Certain family court hearings to take place in public in radical trial
Family court hearings are to be held in public for the first time, in a radical trial being pursued by the leading family judge for England and Wales, the Guardian understands.
Sir James Munby, the president of the family division of the high court, is to continue far-reaching reforms to bring more transparency to the system in 2017 by launching a trial in which some types of hearings would be held in public. 
It is expected appropriate orders will remain in place to protect the identities of the participants. A separate plan is being considered to allow the media access to documents from hearings that have previously been kept secret.
Women who have suffered domestic violence and experienced the family courts broke the ban on discussing their cases to reveal to the Guardian how they believe the secrecy of the system allows them to be further abused by ex-partners.
Claire Waxman, of Voice4Victims, who campaigns to highlight abuse of process within the family and civil courts, welcomed moves to increase the openness of the court system. “We would support the increase of transparency in the family courts,” she said. “We are seeing far too many victims of stalking and domestic violence being exposed to unnecessary risk and harm in these court proceedings.”
But Munby’s changes are likely to be opposed by much of the legal profession working within the family division.
Joanne Edwards, former chair of Resolution, the national family law association, and head of family law at Forsters, said: “There is pretty widespread, if not universal, opposition to the public hearing pilot which is being suggested and to the release of court documents to members of the press.
“There is strong opposition to any further opening up of the court amongst the professions. For us it is about safeguarding the interests of children who, unlike in criminal proceedings, invariably become embroiled in family proceedings through no fault of their own. There is a real risk of jigsaw identification and once details of their private family life are out there, they can never be retrieved. The resulting harm to children can be profound.”
Family courts, which deal with issues such as divorce, financial provision for children, contact with children, adoption and local authority intervention to protect children, were opened to the media in 2009, but hearings largely remain secret. Judges can limit media attendance, there are tight restrictions on what – if anything – can be reported, the media have no access to documents and can be ordered to leave the court on the decision of the judge or magistrate.
Munby consulted closely with senior lawyers in Australia, where family courts have been held in open hearings for the last 30 years, before launching the reforms. He has said pursuing further transparency in family courts is a subject close to his heart.
He issued guidance in January 2014 aimed at encouraging judges to publish their judgments on the judicial website Bailii in redacted and anonymised forms to protect the identities of children. But the guidance only applied to the top level of judges and in the vast majority of family cases heard by district judges and magistrates, judgments are not published.
According to Ministry of Justice figures, 225,590 cases were completed in the family court in 2015, almost half of which were divorce cases. In the same year, judges published 469 judgments on Bailii.
Prof Julie Doughty, lecturer in law at Cardiff University, who is being funded by Nuffield to research transparency in the family courts, said current measures did not go far enough. “The judicial guidance of 2014 hasn’t ended the perception and allegations of secrecy in the family courts,” she said. “I don’t think you get transparency through publishing judgments on Bailii. To get transparency you have to present it in a way people can understand and make sense of quickly. Bailii does not really help the system become more transparent at all.”
In a consultation document issued to lawyers in 2014, called Transparency: the next steps, Munby acknowledged the profession’s “nervousness” about further moves to increase transparency. But he said there was a need for greater openness to improve public understanding of the court process and confidence in the court system. “The public has a legitimate interest in being able to read what is being done by the judges in its name,” he told lawyers.
He is likely to announce progress in the new year on the two key reforms in the consultation document: a pilot of family hearings being held in public, and the release of documents to the media. The latter will include case summaries, skeleton arguments of the case, documents which are issued during fact-finding hearings – for example where allegations of domestic violence have been made – and experts’ reports, to allow the media to perform their watchdog role in society, he said.
Munby has already canvassed initial views on the public hearings and if he gives the go-ahead for the trial, it will go out to further consultation with the profession.
But responses to his consultation were almost universally hostile. The proposals were rejected by the Association of Lawyers for Children, which has 1,400 members, the Family Law Bar Association, Resolution, the national family lawyers’ association, and Family Justice Young People’s Board, a group of young people who have had direct experience of the family justice system.
Cris McCurley, a family lawyer who specialises in representing black and minority ethnic women in cases involving extreme domestic violence, said holding hearings in open court could stop vulnerable women taking part in hearings. “Family courts hear intimate personal details and even with anonymity imposed I think the particulars of cases would be identifiable certainly within their communities,” she said. “My worry is it would stop women coming forward to seek help to protect their children.”
Lucy Reed, a family law barrister, who runs the Transparency Project, which aims to increase understanding of the system, said opening up the courts further should be an issue for parliament to discuss.
A spokesman for the judicial communications office said Munby intended to issue further guidance on the issues raised in his August 2014 consultation on transparency in the new year.
One day in early August, 36-year-old Gavin bumped into an old friend outside That’s Entertainment music and DVD shop in Preston market.
“He pulled me to one side, but I didn’t recognise him,” Gavin (a pseudonym) says when we meet a week later. “He was like, ‘How you doing? I’m just going to get some stuff, make some money.’ He’s opened his bag and it’s full of razor blades. He’s selling razor blades for a tenner a pop, all of that business.”
Gavin says that he and the man were former “grafting partners”: commercial burglars and thieves, working around Lancashire. But in the six years since they had last seen one another, their lives had taken divergent paths.
“He’s ended up on the gear, shoplifting,” Gavin says. “I was like, ‘See you later mate.’ I felt guilty, tight, leaving him, but I thought: ‘What would happen if I’m with him and he gets pulled over and I’m in the hospital?’ I’d be in a lot of trouble, wouldn’t I? I gave him a couple of quid to buy himself a couple of pies, a cup of tea, and he wandered off … I sat there and thought: ‘If I’d not been in here, it’d be me doing that.’”
Gavin relates the story inside a meeting room at Guild Lodge hospital, in the Lancashire village of Whittingham, where he has lived for the past three years. Guild Lodge is one of 60 medium-secure mental health hospitals in England and Wales that house people deemed to be a danger either to themselves or others on account of their mental illness. Most of the 149 patients have committed offences while mentally ill, or have been diagnosed with a mental illness while already in prison. Some have been in higher-security institutions; almost all are being held under the terms of the Mental Health Act.
Gavin, who has schizophrenia, describes a life of substance abuse and crime, sometimes with violence, that took him in and out of prison and secure care settings for the past 18 years – his entire adult life. He was most recently admitted to a medium-secure ward at Guild Lodge in 2013, and is now in low-secure, from which he is permitted release to go into town, as he waits first for a tribunal hearing that could clear him for discharge and then, crucially, for a bed in supported accommodation.
“It might not work if I was just kicked out like I was in the prison system. I would have nowhere to go,” Gavin says. “I’d be on the street, in a hostel, back in crime or something. When I’ve been released from prison, it’s been a few weeks at the most. I’ve been straight back in for something else.”
From 1873 until 1995, the leafy park that surrounds Guild Lodge’s complex of modern buildings concealed Whittingham Hospital, which was Britain’s largest psychiatric institution and a centrepiece of the notorious Victorian asylum system. But Guild Lodge, which opened in 1999, is a striking representation of the advancements in secure-care provision across the UK – particularly at a security level one step below Broadmoor, Ashworth and Rampton, England’s three high-secure forensic psychiatric services.
From the outside, the pale bricks and long windows of the medium-secure area of Guild Lodge could pass for a leisure centre. Even the high mesh fence that surrounds it could be for tennis courts or a five-a-side football pitch. The low-secure area that sprawls outside looks and feels like a business park. There is little to distinguish buildings containing administration offices and meeting rooms from the wards in which patients sleep.
Service users (the preferred term for patient) considered low-risk are free to wander through the adjacent woodland, around an Anglican church, a cemetery and even a cricket pitch. One service user, who told me he spends much of his days watching wildlife and listening to music on a wind-up radio, insisted that a relative of local hero Andrew Flintoff was the groundsman.
As with all hospitals, the aim is that patients will one day be discharged from Guild Lodge with their illnesses under control. It is recovery-focused rather than punitive, and although the Ministry of Justice retains a controlling interest in the onward progression of many patients (some will go back to prison), funding for medium-secure hospitals comes entirely from NHS England’s special commissioning budget.
The unique challenge is to balance care with custody; to maintain the public’s security while effectively treating patients’ illnesses. For thousands of people like Gavin, who is genial, articulate and rational when his schizophrenia is under control, secure care units can prove the difference between what might be considered a worthwhile life, and one wasted as hostage to an unpredictable and often dangerous illness.
Such endeavours are not cheap. According to figures from NHS England, expenditure on medium- and high-secure mental health services during the past year was £1.23bn, which accounts for 74% of the special commissioning budget and is one fifth of all public spending on adult mental health care. Accurate figures on a patient-by-patient basis are difficult to obtain, but conservative estimates put the cost of a bed and care for a year in a medium-secure hospital at £150,000, nearly five times as much as a male inmate in a category B prison.
Partly because of their cost, forensic psychiatry hospitals are under almost constant review. Medium-secure services in particular have remained a focal point for mental health campaigners, who say patients are often too readily admitted to an unnecessarily high level of security and then stay too long. The most recent government taskforce report on mental health – titled Five Year Forward View for Mental Health, released in February – made fresh commitments to “prevent avoidable admissions”, support recovery in the “least restrictive setting” and “address existing fragmented pathways in secure care”. In essence, it emphasises a need to get patients hastily into secure care when mental illness is the root cause of their offending, but also to discharge them quickly and safely, with adequate continued care, to get on with their lives.
Yet there remain frequent claims that the Ministry of Justice is overly cautious in approving discharge from secure hospitals, and that there is inadequate onward housing provision for patients reintegrating into communities. In general, treatment for mental illness has progressed significantly since the days of the asylums, but age-old misconceptions persist about psychiatric institutions. Patients still suffer familiar prejudice on account of their illness, compounded by their detention in hospital.
“It’s very, very risk-averse stuff,” says Jenny Shaw, the recently retired clinical director for specialist services at Lancashire Care Foundation Trust, which oversees Guild Lodge. “Even having conversations with some of my friends, who should know better, [I hear] ‘How can you ever let people who have committed those kinds of offences out?’ It’s a complete lack of understanding of what we’re trying to do. I think there’s still a massive stigma around mental health, and people with mental health problems and who are offenders – it’s a massive double whammy.”
I visited Guild Lodge twice earlier this year, touring the medium-secure unit and talking to some service users about treatment programmes and the challenges they face. Journalists are rarely permitted inside secure care environments: service users are often vulnerable and their recovery programmes easily undermined by external distractions. Administrators are also wary of the sensationalist reporting mental health hospitals have been known to attract, while victims and their families stand to gain little by repeated exposure to the perpetrators of the crimes against them. All names have therefore been changed and details of offences omitted.
In general, people who have committed offences as a result of a mental illness tend to be blighted by extreme guilt for their actions. Many people hear voices or suffer delusions that have encouraged their offences. Hospitals house people suffering from a vast range of illnesses – schizophrenia, psychosis, acute depression, bipolar disorder – from hugely varying backgrounds, many of whom have suffered extreme trauma. The propensity to self-harm is also high.
The area “over the fence” – as one service user described the medium-secure part of the hospital – has the atmosphere of a vocational college, albeit one in which most doors are permanently locked. Staff and visitors pass through an air-lock security door, past a small office where patients can meet guests, and then into a courtyard, with various separate buildings situated either side of an access road and areas of green lawns. After appropriate risk assessment, service users are allowed access to an art room and wood and metal-working workshops, or to learn gardening skills in an on-site greenhouse and nursery. There is also a music room, and a service-user band regularly plays gigs both in and outside the hospital.
My visit to the medium-secure unit coincided with lunch, when the common areas were almost entirely deserted. Patients were in gender-specific wards, where they sleep in single-occupancy rooms, with washing facilities, and are locked in overnight. Although neither staff nor service users denied that tempers can flare, and that patients’ moods and illnesses can often raise tensions inside the hospital, I saw no threatening behaviour. Patients at different stages of recovery demand varying levels of supervision, but I met service users for interview in the low-secure area to which they brought themselves and left unescorted.
Many patients in secure care have co-morbidity issues – drug or alcohol misuse, or personality disorders – and programmes work to tackle these, as well as to improve patients’ physical health. Smoking is entirely prohibited inside Guild Lodge, and service users are encouraged to use an on-site gym and sports hall. Weight gain remains one of the most damaging side-effects of many psychotropic medications, leading both to physical ailments and reduced self-esteem.
Guild Lodge is also relatively unusual in that its administrators have won a battle to permit computer use for service users. Access to technology brings out the most risk-averse tendencies of lawmakers, who fear that vulnerable patients may be drawn to the darkest fringes of the internet. (Mobile phones are also strictly forbidden.) But a lack of even rudimentary IT skills may be damaging to a patient’s prospects of reintegrating to the job market on release. Service users can suffer an extreme sense of isolation, as though they are separate from the community in which they hope to reintegrate. Any further barriers, such as a lack of basic skills, only compound anxiety issues surrounding discharge.
One low-secure service user named Janet, who was not at Guild Lodge and who met me in a coffee shop in London, described a scenario where she was required to go online to arrange her own onward housing in order to be discharged from a hospital, but was not permitted access to the internet before she left.
“In the five years I’ve been in hospital, the world has moved a lot,” Janet says. “One of the people I live with has been in hospital for 16 years. She is about to be discharged and she has got no concept of how to use the internet. None at all.”
She adds: “No matter how confident you are as an individual, your confidence just plummets. Even the most arrogant individuals in hospital – it’s quite interesting watching them go out into the community, all that arrogance and bravado seems to quite quickly crumble. It’s fearful. We have a bridge at the front of the hospital. It’s called ‘life beyond the bridge’. Patients fear crossing that bridge.”
In recent years, studies into the effectiveness of treatments for mental illness, including schizophrenia, have centred on involving patients themselves in planning their own recovery. Research has shown that patients respond better to treatment when they are engaged in it and given more control over the direction of their own care.
In the secure environment, attempts to empower patients in this way can be seen to run counter to the demands of security, but initiatives are now in place that focus on service-user involvement and are aimed at hastening recovery and expediting discharge. “These things are related,” says Ian Callaghan, a former service user, with experience of both low- and medium-secure hospitals, who now works for Rethink Mental Illness. “As soon as a person’s mental health is stabilised, things should change. Stabilising mental health and managing risk go hand-in-hand.”
Callaghan is the national service user lead for a Department of Health initiative named My Shared Pathway – a programme followed throughout a patient’s stay in hospital. My Shared Pathway is tailored to an individual’s specific needs and defines closely their shared relationships with the clinicians, support workers, other service users and eventually the community they hope to return to. Meanwhile, a scheme launched by Rethink Mental Illness’ Innovation Network is aiming to involve service users in planning their futures in a far more detailed way than has been the norm.
These initiatives aren’t to everyone’s taste. One 57-year-old service user, who had spent many years in Ashworth high-secure hospital before transferring to Guild Lodge seven years ago, said: “They have meetings about when to organise meetings.” The same service user was also not a supporter of the smoking prohibition, and said fellow patients squirrelled cigarettes just outside the fence.
Nevertheless, initial feedback from staff and patients has mainly been good, and further trials are also currently under way to enhance the role of peer-support workers in secure hospitals. The idea is that experienced service users can volunteer their support and advice to other patients, building on informal relationships on some wards and broadening networks of trusted individuals. Service users are known to respond well to people who have been through the secure-care system and have successfully returned to the community. Janet says: “It does sometimes take somebody who has recovered to let you see the light a little bit.”
Service users and staff both told me that it can be detrimental to recovery if, after being cleared for discharge by a clinician, a patient is denied release either by the Ministry of Justice, or by a lack of onward accommodation provision. After the taskforce recommendations, NHS England is trialling a reorganisation of budgets to allow local administrators to manage pathways out of hospital and into community mental health care teams. The aim is that medium-secure services be used only to address the most pressing clinical needs, rather than by patients for whom there is simply nowhere else to go.
Gavin says that the severity of his illness did not allow him to understand the benefit of his treatment during previous admissions to secure hospital. He returned to the prison system and stopped taking medication, leading to a deterioration in his condition. (Prisoners can reject medication, but some sections of the Mental Health Act, under which service users will be in hospital, allow for doctors to administer it without consent.) Eventually, after returning again to secure care, a course of therapy helped him manage his illness and turn over a new leaf.
“You get to a certain point where [you think], ‘What’s been going on? What have I been doing with my life?’” he says. “I just want to leave now. I don’t smoke anymore, I’ve not done drugs, I’ve not drunk alcohol and I don’t intend to. I don’t want to go back to that life.”
The shadow attorney general, Shami Chakrabarti, has pledged to end the “authoritarian arms race” to lock up more criminals as prison officers deal with the aftermath of the latest in a string of prison riots.
In remarks that are being seen as signalling an end to New Labour’s “tough on crime” mantra, Chakrabarti said prison overcrowding had contributed to “a crisis this Christmas in British prisons”.
Speaking on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme after riot officers ended a disturbance at HMP Swaleside on the Isle of Sheppey, Chakrabarti said: “In my adult lifetime I have seen a doubling of the prison population and I think this was caused by an authoritarian arms race in British politics between the two parties. We are not in the arms race.
“After my background, I wouldn’t have joined this shadow cabinet if I didn’t think there was an opportunity to at least reflect on what has been going on for nearly a quarter of a century. I don’t believe the sum of human wickedness has doubled in my adult lifetime.”
Her comments follow the intervention by the former deputy prime minister Nick Clegg and the former home secretaries Ken Clarke and Jacqui Smith demanding a dramatic reduction in the prison population.
Chakrabarti, the former director of the human rights organisation Liberty, suggested that Labour was prepared to listen to prisoners who had been rioting in Britain’s jails. “There is a crisis this Christmas in British prisons. We have to call for calm, because I’m sure it is a very miserable time to be inside a prison, whether you are working there or incarcerated there. We know there is a crisis. We have to say to prisoners: ‘We are listening. We want this to be a better, safer environment.’
“We now have overcrowded, understaffed prisons. They are very unsafe places for prison officers and prisoners alike.”
She also called for a fundamental rethink of criminal justice policy that would include ending private sector involvement in running jails.
“We have an opportunity now for a different kind of conversation and to ask some really serious questions about what prison is for, and what do we want to achieve when we send someone to prison?” she said.
“I think we need to ask questions about whether it is right that there are companies that are profiting from incarceration. Private prisons are exempt from freedom of information, so we can’t deliver the same level of scrutiny to G4S that we can in relation to public sector prisons. I question whether there should be commercial incentives to lock up more and more people.”
A G4S spokesman said Chakrabarti was wrong to claim that private companies had a financial incentive to see an increased population behind bars.
“We are paid by the taxpayer per available prison place, not per prisoner, so it’s inaccurate to suggest we have an incentive to see more people locked up,” he said. “In fact we run some of the most progressive programmes in the country aimed at reforming and rehabilitating prisoners in the hope that they turn away from crime on release.
“Nor is it true to say that our prisons business is not subject to freedom of information. We provide government with information all the time to satisfy FoI requests regarding the facilities we manage.”
The Labour MP and former minister John Spellar accused Chakrabarti of unilaterally abandoning Labour’s policy of being “tough on crime and tough on the causes of crime”.
Her remarks came as the Prison Officers Association threatened a new wave of industrial action after rejecting a government pay offer. A ballot of members turned down the offer by 65.7% to 33.7%.
The POA’s general secretary, Steve Gillan, said he wanted to end the dispute through negotiation, but had not ruled out taking further industrial action.
“We have got a meeting on 10 January with the secretary of state [Liz Truss]. If she indicates to us that there is nothing else on the table, then our executive will determine a way forward and that will rule nothing in and nothing out,” he told the Guardian.
Asked whether the union was considering strike action, Gillan said: “I can’t spell out what that could mean, because we keep everything under wraps. I would rather a negotiated settlement than confrontation with the government.”
Gillan said the latest riot at Swaleside prison showed the kind of pressure that prison officers were under. “Our members at Swaleside and all over the country are picking up the pieces of failed government policy. Our members are brave and resilient, and it is about time they were rewarded by government … to ensure that prisons are safe and our members are safe,” he said.
Mike Rolfe, the national chair of the POA, said: “Prisons can work. What you have got to do is make sure you have got the staffing in place and you resource it properly. They need to be resourced properly. Unfortunately because it is a service that is behind walls and hidden, it is just somewhere they think they can cut quite easily and the general public aren’t going to notice.”
Other lives: Human rights activist who spent her later years championing animal welfare causes
Just as we’d resigned ourselves to the fact that the best 2016 was going to offer by the way of cheer was a new Star Wars film, and the prospect of a few mince pies and a tonne of mulled wine, Europe’s top court has given us a very welcome early Christmas present.
For anybody with an interest in protecting democracy, privacy, freedom of expression, a free press and the safety and cybersecurity of everybody in the UK, Wednesday’s EU court of justice judgment is cause for celebration.
In a landmark ruling – its first major post-referendum judgment involving the UK – the court ruled that our government is breaking the law by collecting all our internet and phone call records, then opening them up freely to hundreds of organisations and agencies.
This was a challenge brought by Labour deputy leader Tom Watson (and initially Brexit minister David Davis), and represented by Liberty, to the Data Retention and Investigatory Powers Act (Dripa) – a temporary “emergency” law covering state surveillance, rushed on to the statute books in a matter of days in 2014.
It makes communications companies store records of all our emails, texts, phone calls and internet correspondence. This treasure trove of private information can then be accessed by a huge number of organisations and government agencies – from police forces to HMRC – and of course by hostile powers and terrorist hackers too.
If police wanted to root through your bedroom drawers, you’d expect them to have a warrant and a bloody good reason. But if they want to dip into this deeply sensitive personal data, they have a year’s supply of information sat waiting and can grant themselves permission. No need for sign-off from a judge. No need to suspect someone of a crime.
We argued that this breached British people’s rights – and on Wednesday the judges agreed. They said this national data hoard lets the state draw “very precise conclusions” about people’s private lives – including “everyday habits, permanent or temporary places of residence, daily or other movements, the activities carried out, the social relationships of those persons and the social environments frequented by them […] information that is no less sensitive, having regard to the right to privacy, than the actual content of communications”.
The judges also said it’s not right to gather data on innocent people – that instead it must only be harvested where there is suspicion of serious crime. And they said if someone is spied on, they have a right to know about it afterwards so that they can challenge it if it was wrong, and so we all know the true scale of the state’s surveillance regime.
These are simple, vital safeguards to introduce fairness, accountability and transparency into an otherwise shady world.
Dripa expires on 31 December. So why does any of this matter? Because a new law – the Investigatory Powers Act – has been passed to replace it. Think of it as the Death Star of surveillance laws – huge, impenetrable, and capable of doing massive damage.
It replicates all the same powers found unlawful yesterday – but it goes much further. It forces service providers to generate and store records of all our internet histories. Every site we visit, every app we open, every piece of software we download.
What do your internet searches give away, when you think about it, that might be dangerous in the wrong person’s hands? Your religion? Sexual interests? Health concerns? Political views?
As with Dripa, this can then be accessed by hundreds of public bodies – everyone from the Department for Work and Pensions to the Gambling Commission. No need for a judge to authorise access. No need for suspicion of crime.
After yesterday’s ruling, the unlawfulness of these new powers is beyond question too.
They’re also a major threat to our cybersecurity. These records are stored in vast databases which – at a time when companies and governments are under increasingly debilitating attacks from hackers – create goldmines for criminals and foreign spies. And it’s set to cost an estimated £170m.
But there’s more. Under the Investigatory Powers Act, the state has the ability to indiscriminately hack phones and computers, intercept our communications and build and acquire huge databases containing sensitive information on millions of people – which could include everything from your Oyster card logs to Facebook back-ups.
The government has announced it will try to fight the EU court’s ruling. Instead of wasting public money battling unwinnable cases, we urge it to swallow its pride, shoulder the responsibility of being democratic leaders and amend the act to create a targeted surveillance system – not one that sweeps up everyone’s private lives and swamps our spies with too much data.
The British state has used fear, spin and the guise of counter-terrorism to sneak through totalitarian-style surveillance laws. But our message to the government is clear: the jig is up. Since the Investigatory Powers Act passed, more than 200,000 people have signed a petition calling for its repeal – and if the government doesn’t act, Liberty will see them in court.
There’s reason to hope in 2017. This is a big victory, and it will be the first of many. And we all know what happened to the Death Star in the end.
My friend Joan Court, the animal and human rights activist, who has died aged 97, was driven by a powerful impulse to expose and remedy injustice and cruelty. She was also, as she put it, a “born sensualist”, her tastes running to strong colours, perfumes and “exciting action”. This, and her desire to do good, underpinned her many adventures.
Her start in life was hard: her father, Cecil Court, a solicitor, took his own life, and her mother, Muriel (nee Gibson), was an alcoholic. She had an older brother, Peter.
Joan’s schooling ended when she was 12, after her father’s death. She and her mother moved from their London home to work in domestic service in Cornwall and then Cape Town, South Africa. Returning to London in 1936, she went on to qualify as a nurse and midwife at St Thomas’ hospital, and as a social worker in Bristol. She practised as a midwife and, funded initially by the Friends Service Council (FSC) and later as a World Health Organisation employee, worked in impoverished regions of India and Turkey, and the Appalachian mountains of North America.
In the 1960s, she was appointed director of the NSPCC battered child research unit, and was influential in gaining acceptance of a then unfamiliar concept in the UK.
In 1946, when she was working for the FSC, organising midwifery services in the slums of Calcutta (Kolkata), she met and got to know Mahatma Gandhi. Joan, a lifelong vegetarian, developed a profound respect for his commitment, compassion and determination to achieve change through non-violent means. She tried to emulate these goals, campaigning first for children and, for the last 38 years, for animals.
In 1978, after seeing a poster describing the horrors of animal research, she took part in an Animal Aid anti-vivisection march in Cambridge. The next day she founded a new Cambridge group, which was soon involved in all animal-related issues, including live exports, hunting, shooting, whaling and the meat and dairy industries.
Her advanced age made her attention-grabbing stunts also irresistible to the media. Her animal campaigning began just before she was 60 – when she gained a social anthropology degree from Cambridge. There were banner-hangs, public hunger strikes and sit-downs in inconvenient places. She locked herself in a cage and chained herself to railings. In speeches and interviews she refused to apologise for radical direct action, although she was opposed to violence.
Her most lasting triumph was, with Pat Griffin and Sue Hughes, as one of three Cambridge “granarchists” who initiated what became a national campaign of opposition to Cambridge University’s plans for a massive new research facility that would have specialised in invasive neurological experiments on monkeys. The university abandoned the project in January 2004.
At the age of 85, she joined the Sea Shepherd flagship, Farley Mowat, on a hunt for illegal fishing vessels in the South Atlantic.
Joan could be self-absorbed, cantankerous, bossy and infuriating, but her friends were friends for life.
A teenage prisoner killed himself after he was transferred to a new institution, where staff failed to recognise his history of self-harm as a risk factor, an inquest jury has ruled.
Josh Collinson, 18, was found hanged at Swinfen Hall young offender institution in Staffordshire on 3 September last year.
He had been transferred the previous day from Parc prison, in south Wales, where he had self-harmed on six occasions and been placed on a list of at-risk prisoners.
The inquest jury at South Staffordshire coroner’s court found that Collinson should have been on the register – known as an Assessment Care, Custody, Teamwork (ACCT) register – after he had self-harmed six times at his previous prison.
Deborah Coles, the director of the charity Inquest, said Collinson’s death was preventable and an example of the catastrophic consequences of failures in assessment of vulnerable prisoners and sharing of vital information.
“The failures to protect vulnerable teenagers with mental health and learning disabilities were well documented in Lord Harris’s review of the deaths of young people in custody,” she said.
“The failure of government to implement the Harris review recommendations is resulting in the ongoing number of people dying alone and in despair in prisons. It is shameful.”
The inquest heard that Collinson, who was serving four years in prison for having sexual relations with a girl under 16, had been monitored closely at Parc after self-harming six times.
The jury were told that reception staff at Swinfen Hall failed to put Collinson on an at-risk register, despite the incidents at Parc.
The inquest heard that the staff on duty on the day Collinson arrived at Swinfen Hall were not aware of its policy of treating all new transfers as potentially being at risk of self-harm.
In their narrative verdict, the jury said Collinson should have been placed on an ACCT register immediately on his arrival at Swinfen Hall.
Collinson had lived in Ynyswen Treochy, about 40 miles from the prison, and had received regular visits from his family. He was moved due to population pressure and the jury ruled this was also a factor in his death.
The South Staffordshire coroner, Andrew Haigh, said he would write a “prevention of future deaths report” to the National Offender Management Service to recommend the implementation of a clear policy on transfer which ensured that a prisoner’s particular vulnerabilities were considered.
The inquest heard that, although Collinson was placed on an ACCT register after he self-harmed at Parc, he was not referred to a psychiatrist and received no therapy.
The jury were also told that Collinson’s mother was seriously ill while he was in Parc and died the following May. A member of the Collinson family said his mother was mindful she might not see the outcome of her son’s inquest and thought it important that the process continue in order to seek accountability and prevent future deaths.
The barrister Sam Jacobs represented the family at the inquest. He said that having a swollen prison population had real consequences and Collinson’s death was an example of that.
There were signs Collinson had begun to cope at Parc, Jacobs said, but due to population pressure he was moved many miles from his family.
“Transfers between prisons are known to be a difficult and high-risk time and he died on his his first night in Swinfen Hall. It is good news that the coroner is asking for the issue of prison transfers to be looked at nationally,” he said.
The Collinson family member said he was a loving, protective and thoughtful brother, son and uncle.
She said the family hoped the conclusion of the jury and the recommendations of the coroner would help to cultivate a culture of care and compassion in the prison system, especially among vulnerable, young people suffering mental health issues and learning difficulties.
A Prison Service spokesperson said: “This is an appalling case and our thoughts are with Josh Collinson’s family and friends. The safety and welfare of people within our custody is our top priority but we recognise that there were significant failings in the care of Mr Collinson.
“We have already taken action and accepted all the recommendations following the [Prison & Probation Ombudsman] investigation. We will now carefully consider lessons from the inquest findings to help ensure such incidents are not repeated.”
India’s rupee recall appears to have had “a massive impact” on the country’s human trafficking industry, according to advocacy and rescue groups, with some reporting reductions of up to 90% in the number of women and girls being admitted to their shelters.
But other activists said the illegal trade was already rebounding, and that the financial strain of demonetisation on poor communities was pushing new, younger girls into sex work, and forcing women already in the industry to work for credit or for free.
The Guardian contacted 10 human trafficking advocacy and rescue groups to assess the impact of the Indian government’s shock decision last month to scrap the country’s two most used bank notes.
The decision, which voided 86% of the currency in circulation in India and has left the country’s informal economy reeling, was justified partly on the basis that it would deprive criminal groups, including traffickers, of their cash stockpiles. But Indians too have been deprived of cash, limited to withdrawals of 2,500 rupees (£30) a day and stymied by long lines at ATMs and outside banks.
Demonetisation complicated every point in the human trafficking supply chain, starting with a “drastic reduction in the number of sex buyers”, said Sunita Krishnan, the co-founder of Prajwala, a Hyderabad-based NGO that rescues victims of sex slavery.
The dearth of customers for sex workers meant “it obviously did not make any sense to induct any new girls in this period”, Krishnan said. “In my shelter home, on average every month 60 to 70 new, rescued victims are admitted. From 8 November [the day demonetisation was announced] in the last 40 days, only six new victims have been admitted.
“I have been on this mission for more than two decades, and this is the first time I’ve seen the entire flesh trade so badly affected.”
There are 18 million people living in slavery in India, according to the 2016 Global Slavery Index, with about 135,000 children believed to be trafficked in the country every year.
Ashok Rajgor, the chief investigation officer at the Rescue Foundation, said no formal surveys had been conducted, “but our operatives in the field have noticed a sharp change”.
Fewer customers for brothels meant that traffickers had less capital to buy and transport women and girls from states such as Jharkhand, Assam and Bihar, all hubs for the trade.
“The market is totally down,” he said. “When you buy a girl, it’s a huge amount of money, maybe 200,000 rupees. It’s really big money and nowadays it’s very difficult to get that kind of cash.”
But he added: “The traffickers will look for other options. It’s too early to say how, but they’ll manage.”
The introduction of a new 2,000-rupee note, while supplies of small change remained scarce, had distorted the market, making younger girls more vulnerable, said Ruchira Gupta, the founder of Apne Aap, an NGO that works with women across Bihar and in Mumbai, Delhi and Kolkata.
“The demand for younger girls is going up,” Gupta said. “Now that [they] have only 2,000 rupee notes, clients don’t want older women, they want virgins and underage girls.”
She said the financial impact of demonetisation had left some women without enough money to buy food and their daughters at risk of being pushed into sex work.
Pimps, who in some red-light districts will take up to 70% of what a sex worker is paid, were beginning to force women to work for credit, she added.
“Women’s debt is increasing. Where we work in [the Delhi red light district] GB Road, I’m being told that brothel managers have started to keep log books, promising to pay the women later,” she said. “These women are being asked to work for free. They have to sleep with as many man as the pimps say just to have a bed and a meal.”
Other women were paid in old, invalid 500 rupee notes. “And the pimps are forcing them to take the money. [The women] have to stand at the bank for hours ever day [to exchange or deposit the notes]. Their income has been dramatically reduced,” she said.
Swati Maliwal, the head of the Delhi Commission for Women, which has been campaigning to have GB Road shut down and the women working there retrained, said her teams had observed similar phenomena. “The exploitation of women on GB Road has increased tremendously because men are coming and not paying them properly,” she said, adding that some women had started sleeping with up to 30 men each day to make ends meet.
Often, trafficked women lacked the identity papers required to set up a bank account to exchange void currency for new notes – meaning some had seen their cash savings wiped out, said Urmi Basu, head of the Kolkata-based New Light Foundation. “There are thousands of women who have no documentation, no bank accounts, apart from a few hundred rupees they tuck under their blouses,” she said.
A “very big slowdown” had been observed in the child labour trade, said Rakesh Singhal, from the NGO Bachpan Bachao Andolan.
He said his organisation – whose founder, Kailash Satyarthi, won the Nobel peace prize in 2014 for his work – had commissioned a study of the impact of demonetisation on the industry.
“But we have observations that show a very big slowdown,” Singhal said. “Most of the placement agencies for children say there is no domestic child labour supply.
“The whole trafficking industry runs on liquid money, you’re paying the whole supply chain, including agents in village areas, who are paying between 5,000 and 10,000 rupees for each child.”
All agreed the decline in the trade was likely to be temporary. “Trafficking is an organised crime, and traffickers and people involved in this crime adapt to newer means whenever there is a change in situations and the external environment,” said Prabhat Kumar, the general manager of Save the Children, India.
A court in Edinburgh has ruled that an environmental activist can sue Donald Trump’s golf resort near Aberdeen for breach of privacy and compensation after she was apparently filmed without her consent on the course.
A lawyer acting for Rohan Beyts, a long-time critic of resort’s impact on the environment and community, accused Trump’s staff of breaching the Data Protection Act by taking mobile-phone footage of her in April as she allegedly urinated behind a dune on the course.
The ruling raises the prospect of Trump facing a battle in the Scottish small claims court a few months into his first term as US president.
The Guardian revealed in August that Trump International Golf Course Scotland, which is wholly owned by Trump, had breached the UK’s strict laws on data protection and privacy after it failed to register with the Information Commissioner’s Office, despite operating an extensive CCTV system and handling data on thousands of golfers, guests, staff and suppliers. The resort insisted this was due to a clerical error.
Beyts’s lawyer, Mike Dailly, said the result was fantastic. “Although the defendant sought to have the case dismissed as incompetent, or transferred to the ordinary courts with unlimited expenses, or transferred to Aberdeen, all attempts to stop the case progressing were rejected by the sheriff,” he said. “So now there is a case to answer, and witnesses will have to give evidence on behalf of TIGC”.
Beyts, 62, told the Guardian she was delighted with the result and looked forward to making her case.
The case arose from an incident last April when Beyts and a friend used a public footpath across the Trump course to reach the sand dunes and beach that border the golf links. Returning from their walk, the pair say there were challenged by resort staff and then photographed by a local newspaper photographer.
Three days Beyts was visited at home by two Police Scotland officers who formally charged her with public annoyance. A third officer in charge of the complaint told her that two members of Trump’s staff and a guest on the course had filmed her on their mobile phones as she ducked out of sight.
Her prosecution raised fresh accusations from Trump’s critics that his staff were deliberately persecuting opponents and closely monitoring their movements on the resort.
The claim was heard before Sheriff Gordon Liddle on Thursday morning, who swiftly dispatched the arguments made by Paul Motion, the solicitor advocate acting for the resort.
Dailly argued that the case was a straightforward claim for invasion of privacy, on the basis that the resort had admitted it was not registered with the ICO, and that being filmed without her consent had caused distress to Beyts, for which she was seeking £3,000.
Motion questioned whether a small claims court was competent to deal with such a case.
Liddle concluded, however, that while he was aware that he was “dealing with ifs and buts, not black and white”, nothing had persuaded him that the case was incompetent as a small claim.
When Motion argued that the case should be held in Aberdeen, closer to the golf course and relevant witnesses, Liddle quipped: “Should I transfer it to Manhattan?” before noting that there was no reason why Beyts could not sue a company in the place where it had a registered office, in this case, Edinburgh.
Liddle was staunch in his defence of the principle of the small claims court when Motion argued that the case should be transferred to the ordinary courts. The sheriff said: “The effect of sending it to ordinary proceedings may well be [that Beyts] is discouraged from pursuing it because of the expense implications.” The limit on expenses was an “essential component” of the small claims system, he said.
TIGCS said: “Our position on Rohan Beyt’s claim remains unchanged and the matter is now in the hands of our lawyers.”
The next hearing is set to begin on 3 April and last for three days.
Sarah was cross-examined in a family court for more than two hours by a man who was the subject of a restraining order because of his violence towards her.
Michael had attacked her while she was pregnant with his child. He also had 18 convictions for violence, including two attacks on a previous girlfriend, one while their child was present, and had served at least two prison sentences.
Sarah had moved to a secret address to escape his stalking and was a high-risk victim of domestic violence, according to police officers, probation staff and other specialists.
Their relationship had always involved violence and threats. In 2010, when she was pregnant with their child, Michael attacked Sarah in a carpark. He was convicted of actual bodily harm and jailed for 17 weeks.
He was jailed again for 30 weeks when he punched another man linked to Sarah.
By 2013, Sarah had found the courage to leave. But the abuse did not stop. Michael stalked and harassed her for weeks, following her every movement and forcing Sarah to call the police 40 times. He was jailed again for breaching a non-molestation order. When he was released the criminal court imposed a restraining order against him, which prevented him from contacting Sarah or going near her.
But Michael initiated proceedings in the family court for contact with his child and in November 2014, during a fact-finding hearing, he was allowed to stand a few feet from her and question her.
She said: “When he was questioning me, it was like I was back in the house with him. I don’t think for one second the judge had any idea what I was going through. I don’t know how I had the strength to sit there with him asking me all these ridiculous questions and the judge didn’t intervene. But I did it for my children.
“The court’s attitude was that just because he has been violent in the relationship doesn’t mean he cannot have a relationship with the child.”
The court found the majority of facts presented about his abusive behaviour to be true. But after more than 25 hearings, Michael was granted supervised contact with his child, which would eventually move to unsupervised meetings in a church hall. “He has attacked me in public and many others,” Sarah said. “Yet they were suggesting a few ladies in a church hall would be enough protection for me and my child.”
When the child refused to see Michael, saying: “He hurts my mummy, I want to go home”, the court pursued contact for him.
An official from Cafcass, the children and family court advisory service, tried to persuade the child in several interviews, but eventually the official told the court that further persuasion was inappropriate and essentially abusive. The court upheld his recommendation with a final order of no contact for Michael.
Sarah said: “When I first went to court I was blind really. He had all of these convictions, he has been arrested, he has been to prison. I thought he has got no chance. How wrong I was.
“I got out of a really violent relationship but the court threw me back into harm’s way.”
Andrea has been going through the family courts for three years after her ex-partner applied for contact with his child. He has a criminal history of stalking and harassing her. Police say he poses a high risk to her and her family.
Andrea ended the relationship while she was pregnant because of his obsessive behaviour and harassment. He then began stalking.
“When my baby was two-months-old, he came to my new home late at night, he told me he had moved to be near me,” she said. “I agreed to meet him with my baby, but when I did he was only interested in resuming our relationship, which I did not want. He frightened me and tried to manipulate me so I stopped responding to him.”
Andrea reported his behaviour to police and he was given a caution. In May 2012, he was arrested and pleaded guilty to harassment, getting 12 months’ probation. Andrea was granted an indefinite restraining order.
When the child was 18-months-old the father applied to the family court for contact. “The family court ignored the restraining order the criminal court had put in place and continued with his application,” said Andrea. “They forced me to attend court without putting any safeguarding in place.”
Within two days, her ex-partner had set up a fake social media profile and used it to harass Andrea. He was convicted of breaching the restraining order and fined £100. But in the family court he pursued contact with his child.
Separate Cafcass reports strongly recommended no contact between the man and the child because of the high risk he posed to Andrea.
But in 2015, lay magistrates said he should have indirect contact with his child. They were satisfied the man was engaging with mental health services as required.
Andrea was promised she would be able to give evidence via video link but was later told she had to attend.
“I just couldn’t do it, it was just feeding his obsession. I was terrified,” she said. As a result, her written evidence was disregarded. The case is now with a more senior judge.
In late 2016, a senior Cafcass official urged the court to make a final order of no contact, saying any contact may feed the man’s obsession and place mother and child at risk. He wrote: “It is time the matter was ended … the facts do not argue for contact.”
Another Cafcass official agreed, saying a well-documented history of harassment and stalking meant there should be a final order of no contact.
But the judge is continuing the man’s application for contact.
“It feels like they are targeting me and my family,” said Andrea. “I am constantly terrified the court is going to put me and my family in even more danger.”
Clare is a victim of extreme domestic violence, who is considered at risk of severe harm or murder at the hands of her ex-partner.
In 2014, while she was tending her baby, he attacked her at home. He was later refused contact with the child but is now challenging that through the family courts.
For the last year Clare, who received legal aid as a victim of domestic violence, has submitted documents, text messages and witness reports to provide evidence of his violence, repeated threats to kill her and her children and his controlling behaviour.
In a two-day fact-finding hearing, the judge upheld almost all of the facts alleged by Clare against her ex-partner, including threats to set fire to her and the children and a threat to rape her. The judge said the threats to kill Clare and her children were “hideous”.
He acknowledged the behaviour was that of an overly jealous man who wanted to control her, saying one incident was the most “upsetting and distressingly abusive” thing he had ever heard.
However, the judge is ordering the agencies involved to find a way of allowing the father contact with his young child. Clare said: “For me as a mother it shocks me that a judge can see all these violent threats, and see from his criminal record that this is a man who does what he threatens to do, and can be considering allowing him contact with his child. That leaves me speechless.”
Violent and abusive men are being allowed to confront and cross-examine their former partners in secretive court hearings that fail to protect women who are victims of abuse, a Guardian investigation has found.
Mothers involved in family court hearings have given graphic descriptions of the “torture” of being questioned by abusive men – a practice still allowed in civil cases but banned in criminal courts.
They describe how former partners can make repeated, sometimes spurious, court applications to continue the harassment.
In one case, a mother was cross-examined for two hours by her ex-husband despite him being the subject of a restraining order to keep him away from her.
Sarah, whose name has been changed, said: “I thought, why does the judge allow him to continue this abuse? I had escaped a really violent relationship, it was a very hard thing to do, and the court threw me back into harm’s way constantly. It was torture for me.”
Family courts cases are held in private in England and Wales. The testimony of witnesses, documentary evidence, expert statements and judicial decisions are mostly still secret.
Women who spoke to the Guardian knew they were at risk of being held in contempt of court but said they wanted to shine a light on the secretive processes.
The revelations have prompted one MP to demand a review of the way the court system operates and a change in the law. Peter Kyle, Labour MP for Hove and Portslade, said the situation amounted to the “abuse and brutalisation” of women by the legal system. “Mothers need the protection of the law and they need to know in advance that the system is there to look out and protect their interests,” he said.
“It only takes one woman to be placed in a situation where she can be legally be asked by the man who has violently abused her; ‘When did you last have sex?’. That only has to happen once to realise that the system is corrupted and domestic abuse is going on in our system in the courtroom.”
The evidence obtained by the Guardian spans ongoing and completed cases, interviews with participants, lawyers and court officials. It reveals how the family court:
Research by the all-party parliamentary group on domestic violence found that 55% of women had no access to special measures in the family courts, where 70% of separation and child contact cases involve some form of domestic violence.
One mother whose case was examined by the Guardian was told by a judge to sit next to her ex-partner to view a police video of her reporting his sexual assault. She said: “Since when is it OK to force a victim of abuse to sit next to her abuser around a laptop and watch the police video of the statements she made to the police about her sexual abuse? There was no screen in place, they provided no separate room for me.”
Polly Neate, chief executive of Women’s Aid, has presented research to the judiciary that shows a quarter of victims of domestic violence surveyed had been cross-examined by abusive partners. “When we talk to judges about this they say that this never happens. But it is happening, that is clear, and it seems fairly difficult to get this across,” she said.
Neate is in talks with a senior judge selected by the president of the family division, Sir James Munby, to force the courts to follow guidance, known as practice direction 12J, which is designed to protect mothers from direct cross-examination by violent perpetrators of abuse.
Responding to the revelations in the Guardian, Cris McCurley, a family lawyer from the north-east, said: “I have worked on hundreds of cases and the direct cross examination of victims by a perpetrator happens a lot. It is absolutely traumatising. We have got to get something in place to stop this, even if it means appointing a special advocate or even a law student to put the questions instead of the perpetrator.”
McCurley said the cuts to legal aid and the cutbacks in the whole court estate, meant the situation for vulnerable women within the family courts was getting worse. Women who have suffered domestic violence are entitled to legal aid if they can prove with documentation that they are a victim. Many women do not qualify and are forced to represent themselves before their alleged perpetrator.
Jane Monckton-Smith, an expert in domestic homicides, stalking and coercive control, said the family court system was antiquated. “The family courts need to up their game in order to prevent abusive men using the access they are being given by the courts to continue their behaviour,” she said.
Monckton-Smith said the case of Ben Butler, the father who killed his six-year-old daughter Ellie after a family court judge returned the child to him and his partner, should have been a warning sign about how some abusive men can manipulate the system and put women and children at risk. But that had not happened.
Legal aid cuts mean increasing numbers of men and women are representing themselves in court, increasing the chance of some men being able to use the process as part of their continuing harassment, abuse and controlling behaviour. Ministry of Justice figures released in October 2016 show in 80% of family law cases at least one of the parties was a litigant in person.
Zoe Dronfield set up a support group, I want my Mummy (IWMM), after her abusive ex-partner was given emergency custody of their child.
“I speak out because most women cannot,” she said. “The family court stipulates that they must not talk about their case, so the secrecy goes on and they are kept silent.”
Cases examined by the Guardian reveal that judges in some cases appear to be ignoring advice from agencies including police, social services and Cafcass officials, to allow an abusive man contact with a child.
Mandip Ghai, legal officer for Rights of Women, said: “Judges will bend over backwards to try and find a way for contact to take place. We have cases where there has been quite serious domestic violence and Cafcass has recommended no direct contact, but the judge finds a way of deciding to allow it anyway.”
Many courts, she said, were failing to carry out fact-finding hearings where there were allegations of domestic abuse and that could put a child at risk.
“If there is no fact-finding hearing to establish whether there has been domestic violence, then there is no assessment of the risk the child might be in. There needs to be some thought about how this situation can be improved,” she said.
A judiciary spokesman said the president of the family division has acknowledged in public a pressing need to address the issue of abusive men questioning their victims, and the wider issue of protecting vulnerable victims of domestic violence.
In another case, a district judge is allowing a father with a history of violence, who has made repeated threats to kill his ex and his child, to continue his case for contact with the child. His former partner said: “It shocks me that a judge can see all these violent threats, and see from his criminal record that this is a man who does what he threatens to do, and … consider allowing him contact with his child. That leaves me speechless.” 
Claire Waxman, of Voice4Victims who are campaigning to end the abuse of process in civil courts, said the family courts were undermining the criminal justice process. “Women feel bullied by the court and they are terrified of their restraining orders being altered because they know it will put them at risk, so they agree to everything the family court says. It is shocking.”
The Prince of Wales has warned that the rise of populist extremism and intolerance towards other faiths risks repeating the “horrors” of the Holocaust.
Speaking on BBC Radio 4’s religious Thought for the Day slot, the prince delivered an outspoken attack against religious hatred and pleaded for a welcoming attitude to those fleeing persecution. 
He said: “We are now seeing the rise of many populist groups across the world that are increasingly aggressive to those who adhere to a minority faith. All of this has deeply disturbing echoes of the dark days of the 1930s.
“My parents’ generation fought and died in a battle against intolerance, monstrous extremism and inhuman attempts to exterminate the Jewish population of Europe.”
The prince did not mention any politicians by name, but his address will be seen by some as a veiled reference to the election of Donald Trump in the US, the rise of the far right in Europe, and increasingly hostile attitudes to refugees in the UK.
“That nearly 70 years later we should still be seeing such evil persecution is to me beyond all belief,” he said. “We owe it to those who suffered and died so horribly not to repeat the horrors of the past.”
Prince Charles said religious hatred was on the increase, leading to a rise in refugees fleeing persecution.
“According to the United Nations, 5.8 million more people abandoned their homes in 2015 than the year before, bringing the annual total to a staggering 65.3 million. That is almost equivalent to the entire population of the United Kingdom,” he said.
“The suffering doesn’t end when they arrive seeking refuge in a foreign land.”
The prince urged listeners this Christmas to remember “how the story of the Nativity unfolds with the fleeing of the holy family to escape violent persecution”.
He added: “We might also remember that when the prophet Muhammad migrated from Mecca to Medina, he did so because he too was seeking the freedom for himself and his followers to worship.”
The prince recalled meeting a Jesuit priest from Syria. “He told me of mass kidnappings in parts of Syria and Iraq, and how he feared that Christians would be driven en masse out of lands described in the Bible,” he said. “He thought it quite possible there would be no Christians in Iraq within five years.”
He continued: “The scale of religious persecution around the world is not widely appreciated. Nor is it limited to Christians in the troubled regions of the Middle East.” He then cited a recent report that found an increase in attacks on minority faiths.
The Labour MEP Claude Moraes, chair of the European parliament’s civil liberties, justice and home affairs committee, welcomed the prince’s intervention.
He said it was “obvious” which politicians the prince was referring to, “but for protocol reasons he can’t say”. Moraes told the Guardian: “It was a good intervention I think when the right and rightwing UK newspapers dominate the anti-refugee, intolerance, and anti-EU protectionist narrative.” 
The prince was invited to speak as part of BBC Radio 4’s religious programming. It was the third time the heir to the throne had given the address. He first broadcast in the Thought for the Day slot on the anniversary of VE Day in 1995, and did so again in January 2000 to mark the new millennium.
He pre-recorded his message on Monday at his official London home, Clarence House, before it was announced that the Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh had delayed plans to travel to Norfolk for Christmas, because of illness. The prince did not mention the health of his parents.
A trio of senior figures from the three main UK parties has called for a radical rethink of prison policy in England which would lead to the jail population being almost halved.
Kenneth Clarke, the Conservative former home secretary and justice secretary, Jacqui Smith, the Labour former home secretary, and Nick Clegg, the Lib Dem former deputy prime minister, have warned that the prison crisis will do “untold damage to wider society” if it is not addressed.
The prison population should be cut from its current level, around 85,000, to what it was in the 1980s, around 45,000, they say in a letter to the Times.
“To restore order, security, and purpose to our jails, ministers should now make it their policy to reduce prison numbers. We want to see the prison population returned to the levels it was under Margaret Thatcher, herself no ‘soft touch’,” their letter says.
Speaking on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme on Thursday, Clegg claimed that the problem originated with an approach that Michael Howard, as Conservative home secretary, set out in a speech to his party conference in 1993 saying “prison works”.
Clegg claimed that the “‘prison works’ dogma” had subsequently been adopted by governments of all political persuasions, leading to a “very dramatic increase” in the prison population.
This had created an “overcrowded, large, dangerous and crucially ineffective prison system”, he said.
“I think what people are increasingly appreciating is the test of an effective criminal justice system is what keeps the public most safe. And actually locking up, warehousing, increasingly large numbers of people in very, very dangerous conditions, only to see them go out and commit crime again, is not the way to keep society safe.”
Clegg accepted that one cause of the current problem in prisons was the reduction in staffing levels that took place under the coalition, from around 25,000 in 2010 to 18,000 now.
But he claimed that this policy was initiated at a time when Clarke was pursuing policies as justice secretary intended to reduce the number of people being sent to jail. Clarke was subsequently replaced as justice secretary by the more authoritarian Chris Grayling, who did not share Clarke’s views.
Clegg said the size of the prison population was not simply indicative of the crime rate. Sentencing policy was a crucial factor, he said, and he cited factors such as the increase in the number of people subject to indeterminate sentences, the “explosion” in the amount of extra days being added to sentences for crimes committed in jail and the increasing use of recall for prisoners who breach their conditions when released on licence as reasons for the rise in the number of people being detained.
“So there is a lot you can do while keeping society, not only safe, but safer, by bearing down on repeat crime, making sure that prisoners are both punished and rehabilitated, but also changing the myriad of rules that apply to sentencing such that you do not have this overstretched and overburdened prison population,” Clegg said.
In a separate development, it has emerged that G4S, which runs Birmingham jail, has decided to replace locks in the prison after a picture of a set of keys to them was posted on social media during last week’s riot. Replacing the locks will cost around £750,000.
Belfast gay-themed cake case will not go to UK supreme court
Northern Ireland’s attorney general cannot refer back to the supreme court the case of a local bakery fined for refusing to bake a gay-themed cake.
John Larkin QC’s legal bid to get the supreme court to review court rulings against Ashers Bakery was deemed to have come in too late, Northern Ireland’s lord chief justice said on Wednesday.
In October the court of appeal in Belfast upheld a conviction that found Ashers guilty of discrimination for refusing to bake a pro-same sex marriage themed cake.
The family-owned firm in the original case was also ordered to pay £500 compensation to the local gay rights activist Gareth Lee, whose legal action was backed by the Equality Commission for Northern Ireland.
Lee had tried to buy a cake depicting the Sesame Street characters Bert and Ernie below the motto “Support gay marriage” for an event to mark International Day Against Homophobia in 2014.
In his ruling on Wednesday the lord chief justice, Declan Morgan, said that the attorney general’s move came after the case against the McArthur family-owned firm had ended. 
“We do not consider there are exceptional circumstances in this case which require us to re-open proceedings,” Sir Declan said in his judgement.
The rejection of Larkin’s request for a supreme court hearing came about after lawyers for the McArthur family were also refused a plea to appeal the verdict in the same court seven days ago.
The Ashers case has received international attention, and highlighted the tensions between gay rights reformers and the politically influential and socially conservative born-again Christian lobby within Northern Ireland.
Gareth Lee placed his order at Ashers Bakery shortly after the Democratic Unionist party used its power of veto in the Northern Ireland assembly to block moves to make gay marriage legal in the province. The region is the only part of the UK where same-sex marriage is still not recognised in law. 
Lee claimed the baker’s refusal to bake his cake made him feel “like a lesser person” and so he made a formal complaint with the Equality Commission in Northern Ireland who acted on his behalf though the courts.
The DUP has a strong base in the province’s evangelical Christian community and was founded out of the late Dr Ian Paisley’s Free Presbyterian church. The party has consistently blocked proposals in the assembly from other parties including their main partners in government, Sinn Féin, to legalise gay marriage.
A family court judge has criticised “serious and systemic flaws” in how West Yorkshire police and Wakefield council handled a case in which a girl and her mother were wrongly identified as appearing in a child sexual abuse video.
The police and council have paid £20,000 in damages and Wakefield council apologised for the “horrendous” allegation, after the girl and her brother were kept in care for more than nine months.
It emerged that the police had known for months that the video did not show the girl and her mother before the children were returned.
Judgments in the family court are usually private, but Mr Justice Cobb decided to make his ruling, issued this week, public on the condition that the family involved was not identified.
The two children, a boy and a girl, were removed and placed in foster care in February 2015 after their parents were arrested in relation to an investigation into child sexual abuse content.
During the search, police found a video that they believed showed the mother engaged in a sex act with the daughter and a photograph they believed showed the daughter. 
The children were kept out of any contact with their parents for several days after being taken into care, despite expressing “very considerable distress”, the judge wrote, and a lack of coordination between the police and safeguarding authority meant that the girl was medically examined twice in three days.
Forensic experts told the officer leading the investigation, DS Hudson, in late March that video analysis had “eliminated” the mother as a possible candidate for being the woman in the video. In June, evidence emerged showing the video had been shot in the US, rather than West Yorkshire and that it conclusively did not show either the woman or her daughter.
But West Yorkshire police did not share this crucial evidence with social workers or anyone else involved in the case for almost five months. Even the police lawyers were only told of the new evidence in passing in August and were only made aware of how crucial it was in November.
In the meantime, the police continued to investigate, interviewing the parents under caution and showing them the photo of the girl in the video despite knowing it was not their daughter.
DS Hudson “struggled to shake off” his conviction that the video showed the mother and daughter, the court found. At a meeting in August, the judge found, he “misled the local authority” by encouraging them to spot similarities between the woman in the video and the mother. “At that time, he knew that the mother had been definitively excluded from consideration,” Cobb wrote.
The children’s father pleaded guilty to having downloaded images of child sexual abuse in August and was later sentenced to jail. The mother did not learn that she had been cleared until November and her children remained in foster care until mid-December. The authority later accepted “without reservation” that she neither abused her daughter nor allowed her daughter to be abused by the father.
“The damage has been significant; for a period of many months, two children were separated from their mother against whom allegations of the most serious form of abuse were levelled, while all the while, evidence was available which served to exonerate her,” Cobb wrote.
Wakefield council and West Yorkshire police acknowledged a series of failings in their handling of the case. The judge found that although it had been correct to take the children into care when their parents were first arrested, the way the investigation was handled led to the authorities “profoundly and obviously” breaching the human rights of the mother and her children. Among the failings, he said, was “a casual regard, and in some respects total disregard, of ordinary principles of good professional practice”.
Human Rights Watch has condemned the Home Office for its “non-transparent and arbitrary” process for transferring unaccompanied child refugees to the UK.
In a scathing attack, the campaign group said the process was so ill-considered that the government had ended up separating siblings, in breach of the Dubs amendment to immigration laws, which pledged to give some unaccompanied children refuge in Britain.
In the case of two boys from Ethiopia, a 12-year-old was transferred to the UK while his 15-year-old brother was left behind.
In another case, Human Rights Watch said a boy and his half-sister were separated when the girl was reunited with an uncle, but the boy was not because he was not directly related to the adult.
The group based its criticism on interviews with 41 unaccompanied child refugees from Ethiopia, Eritrea, Sudan, Syria and Afghanistan in reception centres in France.
The interviews took place between 5 and 16 December, the period directly before and after the Home Office announced on 9 December that it had stopped transfers from France.
Human Rights Watch said children were being left in the dark on the process, leading to psychological distress and, in two cases, suicidal thoughts.
It said: “Children said they did not have information about how and when they would learn the outcome in their cases, the selection criteria, what recourse, if any, they have if they are not accepted, and how they could follow up with the UK Home Office.
“Several said they were so upset that they could not sleep or eat, and two said they thought of taking their own lives. A 17-year-old boy who had been detained in his home country, Ethiopia, and in Libya en route to France, said that he was desperate to join his aunt in the UK,” it said. The charity said the boy told them: “‘I am very lonely here … I am going to kill myself [if I cannot go].’”
The group concluded that the transfer process for children lacked transparency and was arbitrary, hurting children’s mental health.
The findings echo those of other charities, including Help Refugees, Safe Passage and Social Workers without Borders, who have said both the French and British governments were breaching children’s rights by not having a care plan for each child, as they would for a homeless British or French child.
Minors being monitored by Social Workers without Borders in a reception centre in Taizé, near the Swiss border, have been refusing to eat because of the lack of information from the Home Office.
Other volunteers working in Bruniquel, in the south of France, said two children who had refused to eat had been taken to hospital. They have since been returned to the reception centre.
in the south-western French town of Biscarrosse, a group of Sudanese children demonstrated this week to show their anger at having their applications rejected without explanation.
About 2,000 children were dispersed across France from the Calais camp at the end of October, all of whom expected that they would be eligible for transfer to the UK under the Dubs amendment or the Dublin regulation.
The Dublin law allows unaccompanied minors who have family in another EU country to have their asylum considered in that country.
The Dubs amendment to the Immigration Act allows the government to consider unaccompanied children who have no family for asylum in the UK.
Human Rights Watch said it had found minors who appeared to qualify under the regulation – including a 16-year-old boy who has an uncle, aunt, and grandparents in the UK – still in France.
It said the Home Office transfer criteria to implement the Dubs amendment were too strict and did not comply with its spirit.
Last month, the Home Office was criticised after it announced new Dubs criteria that would stop many Eritrean, Afghan and Yemeni teenagers aged 13 or 14 from getting sanctuary in the UK.
The new guidelines, issued to charities two weeks after the Calais camp was cleared, in effect barred those teenagers regardless of why they had left their home countries.
The guidance said it would take under-13s of all nationalities, those deemed at high risk of sexual exploitation, and those who “are aged 15 or under and are of Sudanese or Syrian nationality” because people from those countries are already granted asylum in the UK in 75% of cases.
Human Rights Watch said the Dubs criteria did not appear to have been correctly followed in all cases, including the separation of older siblings from younger ones who do qualify.
It called for the Home Office to broaden its selection criteria and reminded it that the Dubs amendment was “intended as a humanitarian measure”.
It also criticised the French government for abandoning normal safeguarding rules for children in the reception centres.
It said that the children were being looked after “outside the regular child protection service” and that the children in the reception centres “have not had access to asylum procedures or the regular child protection system in France”. The Home Office has been contacted for comment.
The number of children and men who fall prey to traffickers is rising, a UN study has found, with the global movement of refugees and migrants a major contributory factor.
Although women and girls account for more than 70% of human trafficking victims, the largest increase in the number of refugees and migrants since the aftermath of the second world war has left children and men more vulnerable to exploitation, according to the report.
Yury Fedotov, head of the UN Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), the UN body charged with tackling the problem, warned that the average number of convictions for the crime remains low.
“As this crisis has unfolded, and climbed up the global agenda, there has been a corresponding recognition that, within these massive migratory movements, are vulnerable children, women and men who can be easily exploited by smugglers and traffickers,” wrote Fedotov in a foreword to the study.
Children account for almost a third of all human trafficking victims worldwide, according to the UNODC’s global report on trafficking in persons (pdf), with the number rising to about two-thirds in regions such as sub-Saharan Africa, and Central America and the Caribbean.
While women and girls tend to be trafficked for marriage or sexual slavery, the report found that men and boys are typically exploited for forced labour in the mining sector and also as porters, soldiers and slaves.
The number of men detected among trafficking victims globally rose from 13% in 2004 to 21% in 2014. The number of trafficking victims pressed into forced labour also rose, accounting for 38% of all trafficked people identified in 2014 (as opposed to 32% in 2007). Of that 38%, almost two-thirds were male.
The flow of trafficking victims from sub-Saharan Africa and east Asia was more globally dispersed than elsewhere, for instance in eastern Europe and Central Asia, South America and south Asia. However, most trafficking flows are largely a regional and local phenomenon rather than a global one.
When it comes to trafficking into key destinations such as richer European countries, flows from the continent’s south-eastern regions were the most prominent for a number of years and continued to increase.
Fedotov said there had been a “huge improvement” in the number of countries criminalising human trafficking, which has increased from 18% to 88% since 2003. But conviction rates remain far too low, he said, with victims not always receiving the protection and services countries are obliged to provide.
Fedotov added that people escaping from war and persecution are particularly vulnerable to trafficking: “The rapid increase in the number of Syrian victims of trafficking in persons following the start of the conflict there, for instance, seems to be one example of how these vulnerabilities play out.”
A lawyer for 249 men seeking compensation for alleged sexual abuse at a Catholic children’s home has vowed to continue with one of the largest compensation claims against the church despite a judge dismissing three of the first test cases.
The high court in Leeds awarded one of the claimants £14,000 in compensation and ruled against three other men. Judgment in a fifth case will be given next month.
The men’s lawyer, David Greenwood of Switalskis, said outside court: “This is a skirmish; we will win the ultimate war.”
The claims were made against the diocese of Middlesbrough and the De La Salle Institute, which ran the St William’s children’s home in Market Weighton, east Yorkshire.
The civil case followed the imprisonment earlier this year of the home’s former principal and chaplain for sexual offences against 11 boys between 1970 and 1991.
James Carragher, the former principal, was jailed for 15 years for 21 indecent assaults and three serious sex offences, but cleared of a further 30 charges. It was the third time he had been sent to prison for sexually abusing boys at the home.
Anthony MacCallen, the former chaplain, was convicted of 11 charges, including a serious sexual offence. He was acquitted of eight others.
The residential school, which closed in 1992, was owned by the diocese of Middlesbrough and run by members of the De La Salle brotherhood. It took boys from troubled backgrounds referred by local authorities.
A civil action was launched in 2004 but delayed by a dispute between the diocese and brotherhood over which was liable for compensation of potentially £8m. In 2012, the supreme court ruled that both were liable.
On Wednesday, Judge Mark Gosnell awarded one of the claimants £14,000 “for injury to feelings and the additional upset caused by the fact that it was perpetrated by someone who should have been looking after him”.
He dismissed three other claims, saying the claimants had failed to “discharge the burden of proof of [them] satisfying me that the abuse occurred on the balance of probability”.
Greenwood, who has been pursuing the claims since 2003, said he would appeal against the judge’s dismissal of three of the claims.
“I would say, obviously, on the central issue of whether it happened or not, there was compelling evidence given by all four, all five, of these claimants, and that should be the main issue that we are talking about,” he said.
He was “disappointed that the judge did not see through all these arguments about minor inconsistencies but this is a skirmish; we will win the ultimate war. There are 245 cases still to go, so I’m very confident we will succeed.
“There was a lot of sexual abuse going on at St William’s and these boys deserve justice.”
Both the diocese of Middlesbrough and the De La Salle brotherhood have previously issued statements condemning abuse.
“We deeply regret what happened at St William’s and the harm that was done there through the behaviour of James Carragher. We unreservedly apologise to all who have been affected by his behaviour. Our hearts go out to all victims of abuse and their families,” the brotherhood said earlier this year.
The diocese said: “Abusive behaviour has absolutely no place in the Catholic church, or anywhere in society, and is against everything we stand for.”
Another set of compensation claims is expected before the high court in late 2017.
“General and indiscriminate retention” of emails and electronic communications by governments is illegal, the EU’s highest court has ruled, in a judgment that could trigger challenges against the UK’s new Investigatory Powers Act – the so-called snooper’s charter.
Only targeted interception of traffic and location data in order to combat serious crime – including terrorism – is justified, according to a long-awaited decision by the European court of justice (ECJ) in Luxembourg.
The finding came in response to a legal challenge initially brought by the Brexit secretary, David Davis, when he was a backbench MP, and Tom Watson, Labour’s deputy leader, over the legality of GCHQ’s bulk interception of call records and online messages.
Davis and Watson, who were supported by Liberty, the Law Society, the Open Rights Group and Privacy International, had already won a high court victory on the issue, but the government appealed and the case was referred by appeal judges to the ECJ. The case will now return to the court of appeal to be resolved in terms of UK legislation.
The aim of going to Luxembourg was to clarify EU law on surveillance. The two MPs had argued successfully in the domestic courts that the Data Retention and Investigatory Powers Act (Dripa) 2014 was illegal. Dripa has since been replaced by the Investigatory Powers Act, which comes into force at the end of this month.
At issue was whether there are EU standards on data retention that need to be respected by member states in domestic legislation. The result, though immediately significant, could prove academic once the UK has withdrawn from the EU and the ECJ no longer has jurisdiction over the UK.
In a summary of the ruling, the court said electronic communications allow “very precise conclusions to be drawn concerning the private lives of persons whose data has been retained”.
It added: “The interference by national legislation that provides for the retention of traffic data and location data with that right must therefore be considered to be particularly serious. 
“The fact that the data is retained without the users of electronic communications services being informed of the fact is likely to cause the persons concerned to feel that their private lives are the subject of constant surveillance. Consequently, only the objective of fighting serious crime is capable of justifying such interference.
“Legislation prescribing a general and indiscriminate retention of data … exceeds the limits of what is strictly necessary and cannot be considered to be justified within a democratic society.” Prior authorisation by a court or independent body to access retained data is required for each official request, the ECJ said. 
Before becoming Brexit minister, Davis travelled to Luxembourg to hear the case. He argued that the British government was “treating the entire nation as suspects” by ignoring safeguards on retaining and accessing personal communications data.
Davis, one of the most vociferous critics of the state’s powers to collect data on its citizens, withdrew from the case following his ministerial appointment.
The Dripa case was heard by 15 ECJ judges. It coincided with successive atrocities in Paris, Brussels and Nice that reinforced political demands for expansion of powers to intercept emails and phone calls to help catch Islamic State militants operating on the continent.
Lawyers for the UK government maintained that intercepted communications have been at the heart of every terrorist case investigated by police and the security services in recent years.
Responding to the ruling, Watson said: “At a time when we face a real and ever-present terrorist threat, the security forces may require access to personal information none of us would normally hand over. That’s why it’s absolutely vital that proper safeguards are put in place to ensure this power is not abused, as it has been in the recent past.
“Most of us can accept that our privacy may occasionally be compromised in the interests of keeping us safe, but no one would consent to giving the police or the government the power to arbitrarily seize our phone records or emails to use as they see fit. It’s for judges, not ministers, to oversee these powers.”
Martha Spurrier, director of the human rights group Liberty, said: “Today’s judgment upholds the rights of ordinary British people not to have their personal lives spied on without good reason or an independent warrant. The government must now make urgent changes to the Investigatory Powers Act [IPA] to comply with this.
“This is the first serious post-referendum test for our government’s commitment to protecting human rights and the rule of law. The UK may have voted to leave the EU – but we didn’t vote to abandon our rights and freedoms.” Liberty is preparing to challenge the IPA in court. 
Jim Killock, executive director of the Open Rights Group, said: “Blanket surveillance of our communications is intrusive and unacceptable in a democracy. 
“The government must act quickly to rewrite the IPA or be prepared to go to court again.”
A Home Office spokesperson said: “We are disappointed with the judgment from the European court of justice and will be considering its potential implications.
“The government will be putting forward robust arguments to the court of appeal about the strength of our existing regime for communications data retention and access.”
The shadow home secretary, Diane Abbott, said: “Many of us warned that these powers were far too widely drawn. Effectively, they allow for fishing expeditions where data is collected on a vast number of individuals. They also allow for data gathering against anyone suspected of the most minor crimes, not just terrorism and organised crime, and there is insufficient judicial oversight. Targets were not informed.”
The Liberal Democrat home affairs spokesman Brian Paddick said: “Collecting and storing everyone’s internet web browsing histories and phone records so government agencies can look at them is an Orwellian nightmare that intrudes into our privacy and erodes our civil liberties.”
Daniel Carey, the solicitor from Deighton Pierce Glynn who represented the Open Rights Group and Privacy International, said: “The court is very clear that indiscriminately retaining everyone’s metadata is unlawful, which is a point my clients placed particular emphasis on. This prohibition arises out of longstanding EU legislation, which the UK played an important role in creating.”
Camilla Graham Wood, of Privacy International, said: “Today’s judgment is a major blow against mass surveillance and an important day for privacy. It makes clear that blanket and indiscriminate retention of our digital histories can be a very intrusive form of surveillance that needs strict safeguards against abuse and mission creep.”
The National Police Chiefs’ Council lead for communications data, assistant chief constable Richard Berry said: “We will work within any authorisation and oversight regime deemed appropriate by parliament and courts of law. But it is important for us to have a regime that is practical and dynamic enough to be able to respond to the volume and urgency of our cases. Any changes that impede our ability to access data quickly with appropriate safeguards will undermine our ability to keep people safe.”
The European court of justice (ECJ) ruling that blanket state surveillance without proper privacy safeguards is unlawful is packed with post-Brexit irony – not least in that it involves Britain losing a case in Europe initially brought by its Brexit minister, David Davis. But it is important because it means the battle over digital rights in Britain is not yet over.
Theresa May’s new turbo-charged state surveillance law – the Investigatory Powers Act 2016, with its extensive powers to track the entire population’s web browsing history for two years and allowing industrial scale state hacking of phones and computers – will come into effect from the end of this month.
But the ruling from the ECJ – particularly if, as is likely, it is upheld by British court of appeal judges – will mean that the new law will now face a succession of legal challenges from privacy campaigners fortified by the ruling in their back pockets.
The ruling itself relates to a much more limited British law – the Data Retention and Investigatory Powers Act 2014, known as Dripa – which expires under a sunset clause at the end of this month. That law required the telecom companies to hold all their customers’ communications data – the who, when and where they contacted by phone, text or email – for 12 months so it could be accessed by the police, security services and other public bodies.
The ECJ ruling clarified, at the request of British court of appeal judges, that EU data retention laws say such blanket retention of personal confidential data is unlawful under the EU’s fundamental charter of rights and its directive on privacy and electronic communications.
The landmark ruling says the state can carry out mass surveillance programmes only if they are targeted and not implemented on a “general and indiscriminate” basis. Targeting should be done by reference to time, geographical area or named persons. The ruling also lays down that the communications data can only be used for the purposes of fighting serious crime and access should be authorised by a court except in the most urgent cases.
The ruling is enough to strike down Dripa, should the UK court of appeal accept this “clarification” from the EU’s highest judges, but it will be academic as Dripa will be repealed in 10 days anyway.
However, it does have serious implications for the new snooper’s charter, the Investigatory Powers Act 2016 that includes the data retention powers the EU court has declared to be unlawful without the proper safeguards and which comes into force from 1 January.
The new state surveillance law includes a major extension of powers, including vast databases recording every website visited by the entire population. These databases can be accessed not just by the police and security services but by dozens of other public authorities, and in the case of communications data, without the need for suspicion of criminality or prior sign-off from a judge or other independent official. They include the NHS, Department for Work and Pensions and the Gambling Commission.
The ruling means ministers can no longer be certain that the new snooper’s charter will survive any privacy legal challenges in the British courts. The ruling is unlikely to mean that the Investigatory Powers Act is struck down by British judges, but it may well require further amendment.
Brexit campaigners may claim the ruling is evidence that staying in the EU undermines the fight against terrorism. But the judgment clearly says that the state is within its rights to conduct targeted digital surveillance to fight terrorism and serious crime as long as there are proper judicial safeguards.
Those who say ministers should just ignore the Luxembourg court ruling because Britain will soon be out of the EU will also be disappointed. Whether Britain is in or out of Europe, British judges will still be using this privacy benchmark to hold British ministers and their laws to account.
Any sweeping trade deals the EU wants to sign with other countries will have to be approved by member state governments, a senior EU lawyer has said, in an opinion that could deepen complications over Britain’s post-Brexit future.
Eleanor Sharpston QC, an advocate general at the European court of justice, argued in a ruling released on Wednesday that an EU trade deal with Singapore could only be finalised by the EU and member states, and not by Brussels institutions acting alone.
In practice, this means the deal may have to be ratified by at least 38 national and regional parliaments, including the EU’s 28 national parliaments, at least five regional and linguistic parliaments in Belgium and at least five upper houses, including those of Germany and Italy.
Sharpston’s opinion does not bind the Luxembourg-based court, which is expected to issue its judgment in early 2017. But the court follows the views of advocate generals in a majority of cases.
If her opinion prevails, the EU could find it trickier to sign wide-ranging free-trade agreements. Life would also be harder for the British government, as any post-Brexit trade deal with the bloc could potentially require the approval of at least 38 national parliaments.
This scenario could add years to finalising a trade deal, leaving the British government facing the nightmare possibility that any one regional or national assembly could block a deal.
A taste of the possible drama to come was hinted at earlier this year when the Walloon region of Belgium threatened to veto an EU-Canada trade deal following seven years of tortuous negotiations and legal drafting.
The current case hinges on whether an EU trade deal with Singapore can be finalised by the European commission alone, or whether the approval of national governments is also needed.
The European commission, which negotiates trade agreements on behalf of the EU’s 510 million people, argues it has the power to sign agreements. But national governments contend that the trade deal touches on national competences and requires their approval.
Sharpston said the Singapore agreement, under discussion since 2010, could only be concluded by the commission and member states together.
“While the advocate general notes that difficulties may arise from a ratification process involving all of the member states alongside the EU, she considers that that cannot affect the question of who has competence to conclude the agreement,” she wrote.
She distinguished between EU competences and national ones. The European commission may take comfort from the fact it was deemed to have exclusive power to negotiate trade agreements on a wide range of issues, including trade in goods and many services, foreign-direct investment, many intellectual property questions and competition policy.
But the commission must give member states a say if a trade agreement covers trade in transport services, aspects of public procurement, as well as provisions affecting labour, social or environmental policy, Sharpston said.
A European commission spokesperson said: “This is an important element contributing to the court’s reflection, so we are of course carefully analysing it. However, it must be clear that no definitive conclusions can be drawn until the court itself issues its final opinion.”
The EU currently has 34 trade agreements covering 60 countries. EU trade negotiators have embarked on 19 separate trade negotiations covering 52 countries, including the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership with the US, now put into the deep freeze following the election of Donald Trump.
These trade deals have evolved from relatively simple agreements centred on cutting tariffs to far-reaching accords covering everything from mutual recognition of environmental, safety and labour standards to public procurement.
As a result, national governments are increasingly challenging the EU’s sole competence to conclude such sweeping trade agreements, amid a growing public backlash against free trade and the power of obscure trade tribunals to settle disputes between governments and large corporations.
As the disturbances in Birmingham showed, our prison system is in urgent need of improvement. The justice secretary is surely right to emphasise the need both to restore stability and deliver reform. The recruitment of 2,500 extra prison officers will help make prisons the secure places expected by the public – and deliver the stability we need if reform is to become a reality.
With almost half of all prisoners currently returning to prison within a year of release, after committing more crimes and creating yet more victims, we need to do much more to break the destructive cycles of reoffending. Truss understands this. She is a radical reformer. The justice secretary, like her predecessor Michael Gove, understands that while prison reform may not be a shortcut to political popularity, simply locking people up and throwing away the key is not the answer. Our prisons are at capacity. Our prison governors and their staff are working with limited resources. Successive governments have hinted at reform. Truss is now determined to deliver action, not just words.
The work of prison officers is central to effective rehabilitation, and to changing prison culture. If a prison truly has rehabilitation at its core then it needs to have a consistent focus on it, on the wings and landings as well as in the workshops and classrooms.
Yet when most people think of prison officers, they don’t think of the officer in HMP Belmarsh teaching illiterate prisoners the basics of how to write a letter so they can start to learn; nor the officer in a women’s prison who recently persuaded a prisoner to reconnect with her estranged mother so that her children could live with their grandmother, rather than be taken into care; nor the officer in HMP Wandsworth who talked an offender down from suicide and then helped him formulate a plan to turn his life around.
Prison officers are no mere “turn-keys”, or glorified bouncers. They are the unsung heroes of public service work. Effective prison officers manage, protect and rehabilitate some extremely challenging individuals, people who teachers and social workers have often been unable to help.
The job of a prison officer is challenging and complex, and those who do the job well act as mentors, counsellors, and educators to some of the most difficult and vulnerable people in society. Turning around the life of an offender not only prevents future victims, it can also prevent intergenerational offending. Currently, 65% of boys with a convicted father go on to offend themselves.
Over the past decade, the prestigious scheme Teach First has encouraged many of our top graduates to start their careers in teaching. There are similar programmes for police, social workers, and adult mental health. Today, we are launching an ambitious programme to recruit some of Britain’s best graduates to work in our prisons – to help make a reality of rehabilitation.
Unlocked is a two-year graduate scheme that recognises the importance of the prison officer role, and will create a network of leaders to support a rehabilitation agenda. Our participants will have both impressive academic credentials and the personal attributes to be successful, such as interpersonal skills, resilience, and leadership potential. The programme will include initial training, as well as tailored additional on-the-job mentoring by existing prison officers. Throughout the two years, participants will also be studying for a master’s degree.
Our graduates will learn skills that no university can teach, and develop unique insight into how to help resolve some of society’s most challenging social issues. The programme will demand grit, strategic thinking, and the ability to handle extremely difficult situations. Our participants will be filling actual prison officer vacancies. They will develop expertise in communication, decision making, and complex problem solving. They will have the option to remain in the prison service, either as officers or as future senior leaders, or they may take up top posts elsewhere in the public or private sector.
Some will ask whether this is the right time to launch such a scheme. In our view it undoubtedly is. Truss is right that stability and reform must be delivered in tandem. Rehabilitation is not possible without stability. But only rehabilitation can break the cycle of crime.
Wife of Paul Briggs had argued for Gulf war veteran left in minimally conscious state after motorbike crash to be allowed to die
An Idaho prosecutor’s declaration that an alleged rape of a black, mentally disabled football player with a coat hanger by his white team-mate was not a sex crime and was not racially motivated has sparked mounting criticism among campaigners against sexual assault.
John RK Howard was initially charged with felony forcible sexual penetration by use of a foreign object, but on Friday, the 19-year-old reached a plea bargain that allowed him to plead guilty to a felony count of injury to a child. The deal will allow Howard to avoid prison time unless he violates his probation, the Twin Falls Times-News reported.
The October 2015 assault drew national headlines after the victim told the court that he had been attacked by three football team-mates and sodomized with a coat hanger in the locker room.
The victim’s family filed a federal civil rights lawsuit against the high school and school officials, claiming that the school had failed to protect the student from a campaign of racial harassment by other students that culminated in the sexual assault.
The victim was called racial epithets such as “watermelon”, “chicken-eater”, and “nigger”, and Howard taunted the victim with a “Ku Klux Klan” song, the lawsuit alleged.
But during Friday’s hearing, the prosecutor, deputy attorney general Casey Hemmer, played down both the racial and sexual aspects of the crime, according to the Twin Falls Times-News.
Hemmer told the judge that the crime was not a sex crime and that Howard should not be treated as a sex offender, the paper reported. He also stated that his office did not believe that the crime was racially motivated.
R Keith Roark, one of the attorneys representing the victim in the civil case, said: “The plea agreement is an abomination, and the in-court comments of the prosecutor, if accurately reported, reflect a perverse compassion for the perpetrator of a sickening, violent act rather than a concern for the young man whose life has been turned upside down by group violence – which we believe was indeed, at least in part, racially motivated.
“How this can be anything other than a sexual assault is beyond my comprehension, and I have been prosecuting and defending sex crimes for 40 years,” Roark added.
“Deputy Attorney General Hemmer’s actions and statements dehumanizes the young man who was heinously penetrated and fuels and sanctions our culture of sexism, racism, able-ism, domination, aggression, and violence, and in turn, the Office of the Idaho Attorney General is complicit in state-sanctioned sexism, racism, able-ism and violence,” the Idaho Coalition Against Sexual & Domestic Violence wrote on Facebook.
“Nothing short of a complete retraction by the Attorney General of Hemmer’s outrageous actions and statements and immediate action against Hemmer will be acceptable,” the group added.
A spokesman for the Idaho attorney general’s office declined to comment on the plea or the prosecutor’s statements, citing a gag order imposed by the judge until Howard is sentenced in February 2017.
Lee Schlender, another attorney representing the victim in the civil case, said the victim’s parents were “outraged” by the plea bargain and the statements made by the prosecutor. Schlender said the parents of the victim had not been properly consulted about the plea bargain, and that the victim himself could not approve or disapprove of the deal because he was currently institutionalized.
“The father said he wanted to see these fellas spend some time in prison for what they did,” Schlender said, and referred to the proposed sentence of probation as a “slap on the wrist”.
“To say that this has nothing to do with the fact that he’s one of only one or two black children in the school, and he’s mentally disabled, and he’s the only one that had this happen to him – to say that this doesn’t have to do with race is just incomprehensible,” Schlender said.
Doctors should stop providing life support treatment to a former police officer and British army veteran who was left in a minimally conscious state after a road accident, a judge has ruled.
The wife of the Gulf war veteran Paul Briggs had asked the court of protection to allow her husband to die, saying he would have seen living in his current condition as torture and hell.
Briggs, 43, has been in a minimally conscious state since a motorcycle crash while serving with Merseyside police in July last year. The father of one, who is being treated at the Walton Centre in Liverpool, suffered a bleed on the brain, five fractures in his spine, bruising to internal organs and several other severe injuries in the collision.
Mr Justice Charles announced his decision on Tuesday after analysing evidence presented at a hearing in Manchester last month in the court of protection, where judges consider issues relating to people who lack the mental capacity to take decisions.
The judge agreed that it was not in Briggs’s best interests for treatment to continue, and that it was lawful to withdraw treatment. He recommended that Briggs be moved to a hospice to be given palliative care for the final weeks of his life.
Lawyers acting for Briggs through the government-appointed official solicitor’s office have asked for permission to appeal against the decision, so his treatment is likely to continue until the new year, when a decision will be made on whether the appeal can go ahead.
After the ruling, Briggs’s wife, Lindsey, said the court case had been the hardest thing she had ever had to do and that the past 18 months had been “extremely distressing and traumatic”. She thanked the judge and said he had been able to “place himself in Paul’s situation, and for that we will be forever thankful”.
“All our lives have been turned upside down,” she said, referring to their families, including five-year-old daughter, Ella. “We have been living in darkness and despair, from when Paul had the crash in the first place, through all the uncertainty, having to watch him suffer and be in pain, and all the endless procedures and complications.”
She said the family was dismayed to learn that the decision may be appealed. “We feel overwhelming despair and sorrow, but we know we have to try to somehow cope and continue for Paul,” she said. “Given this continued uncertainty, Christmas will now not be a peaceful occasion for us.”
Doctors had told the judge there was potential for Briggs to emerge from his minimally conscious state, but that the life expectancy of people in his condition was estimated to be nine to 10 years. Medical experts told the court that even in a best-case scenario, Briggs would remain severely physically disabled.
Lindsey Briggs told the hearing on 28 November that he did not recognise her or respond to her when she went to see him. “I think he would see it as torture, just as hell, that everything he believes in and he lives for would just be taken away from him. He would be living for no reason.”
She said that when she looked into his eyes she saw “at best, nothing there, or at worst, distress or suffering”.
Conrad Hallin, representing the Walton Centre NHS foundation trust and the Wirral clinical commissioning group, told the court doctors had noticed some signs of improvement in Briggs’s condition.
Normally, patients at the centre of court of protection litigation are not identified because judges aim to protect their privacy. But Briggs’s accident was widely reported and no one involved in the litigation had asked for him to remain anonymous so the judge allowed him to be named. 
Chelsea Rowe, 26, received a 12-month prison term in July after admitting causing serious injury to Briggs by dangerous driving. Liverpool crown court heard Rowe was driving a Nissan Micra that was in a head-on collision with Briggs’s motorcycle on the Birkenhead flyover.
Last week’s riot at HMP Birmingham and unrest at Hull was not the only bad news for the prison service this year – 2016 has also seen a record number of deaths behind bars, unprecedented levels of serious assaults and self-harm, rampant drug abuse and a spectacular breakout.
“If you don’t have safety, order and control in prisons you have nothing,” says Ian Acheson, 48, a former prison governor who earlier this year undertook the review of Islamic extremism in UK prisons. Acheson lays the blame for the crisis in our prison system firmly at the door of government. Since 2010, there has been a 30% cut in prison officer numbers, and there were 500 fewer frontline prison staff in 2016 alone.
“They should admit they got it wrong – that they cut frontline staff too far; that they understand that some of the consequences of those cuts have been this collapse in prison safety,” Acheson says.
The justice secretary, Liz Truss, last month announced the recruitment of an extra 2,500 prison officers to tackle violence. But, says Acheson, “there ought to be a bit of humility from the government. It needs to accept the policy of removing so many staff was disastrous.”
During Acheson’s review of radicalisation in jails – commissioned by the then justice secretary, Michael Gove – he visited dozens of prisons in Britain and abroad, and concluded that the rise of Islamic extremism in UK prisons was a “serious threat to national security”.
Recommendations included isolating those prisoners identified as presenting an “enduring risk to national security” in special units – “prisons within prisons” – away from the general prisoner population, as well as providing staff training, “with particular emphasis on distinguishing religious from cultural traditions”. These measures have both since been adopted by government.
Acheson insists that the separated regime accepted by the UK government differs fundamentally from the scheme he observed in France, which is now being abandoned, where prisoners deemed to be inspired by Islamic extremism were semi-segregated. “The conditions were extremely primitive, even by the poor standards we now see in UK prisons,” he says. “We envisaged a very small number of these prisoners being completely isolated in purpose-built units, where what I would call ‘enlightened’ separation occurs. These units should offer individualised treatment plans by highly trained staff – and the emphasis should be on humanising relationships between staff and prisoner to change their mindset.”
But surely you can’t contain or isolate an idea? “No. But you need to at least produce an alternative narrative – a counter narrative,” Acheson says. He suspects, however, that staff fear being accused of racism if they attempt to confront the problem.
“There is a legal obligation for institutions like prisons to promote British values. I don’t have any problem at all with British values, such as democracy, the rule of law and tolerance. When I was conducting my review, and spoke to people at senior level in the prison service about these values, some of them looked at me almost with disdain. One of them even said, ‘perhaps we’d call them European values’. That was one example of a cultural mindset that I observed in relation to Islamic extremism. There was what I call an institutional timidity, an unwillingness of the institution to directly confront this problem.”
He believes that the 12,500 Muslims in prison in England are probably most at risk from the threat of Islamic extremism. “They have mothers and daughters and sons and fathers outside, worrying about them being at risk in prison. But the prison service has frankly been asleep for the last six years in terms of understanding the nature and the extent of this problem, despite all of the evidence available to them to do something about it. But it went into the ‘too difficult’ box.
“If I was in prison I’d be making pragmatic decisions about my own safety; if there was a dominant gang that offered me protection, I would join them.”
There is no reason why the same principles of separation cannot apply to other extremists, Acheson believes, such as those peddling far-right views. “We cannot allow extremism of any kind to flourish in prisons,” he states.
For Acheson, however, anti-extremism training and separation have all been eclipsed by what he calls “the order and control crisis”.
“Short term we have to get stability back in prisons,” he says. “To borrow from the Iraq war, we need a ‘surge’ of staff into disordered prisons to restore control and get a decent regime going. Longer term, staff training needs a complete overhaul to equip them properly for the task of managing prisoners with diverse needs and characteristics.”
Over the six months that he and his team took evidence from staff, experts and former prisoners, he says he found staff who were on the edge. “I’ve seen scared staff, spoken to scared staff. Being in some prisons where you expect there to be control and seeing that there really isn’t any is something.” He says a way to lift morale would be to put prison governors in uniform. “The artificial distinction between management and shop floor has created a ‘them and us’ culture which must be ended,” he says. And the quality of the uniforms should be improved. “At the moment staff look like employees of a budget airline as opposed to professionals in a vital uniformed public service.”
Is there any hope that our prisons are ever going to work? “Prison does work because it incapacitates people who have committed crime. But if it’s only for that purpose, it will fail.” As a young prison officer in the 1990s, Acheson says he saw at HMP Grendon (the only therapeutic prison in the UK) what happens when you give people even a small degree of autonomy. “I’ve always believed that prisons ought to be places where we help people rescue their potential. I think a very small number of people are irredeemably broken, who frankly need to be contained – and society needs to be protected from them. But the vast majority need help. It is important to get services to people who are in need, to help them help themselves, but also to prevent them from creating any more victims.”
He says it’s about time prisoners were given meaningful work, paid the minimum wage and had a personal training and education voucher to let them select the training required for meaningful employment after release. And there should be a dramatic increase in in-cell access to remote learning and skills providers via a secure intranet.
Acheson says he loved working in prisons for nine years. “Being a prison officer is the career I am most proud of in my life. It was the making of me,” he explains. “I’ve always thought that prisons were places of possibility. In the 1990s there were lots of hopeful things happening. There was optimism. But if we want to solve the prison safety crisis we have now, we have to change the ratios. Either society decides that it has to have more prison officers, or fewer prisoners.”
Career 2015-present: director of security programmes, Sampson Hall Ltd; 2012-14: chief operating officer, Equality and Human Rights Commission; 2009-12: senior civil servant at Home Office; 2003-09: head of region Youth Justice Board; 2001-03: executive director, Prisoners’ Abroad; 1992-2001: governor HM Prison Service (graduate accelerated promotion scheme from an officer at HMP Grendon, to principal officer HMP Durham, head of security HMP Wandsworth, deputy and then acting governor HMP Erlestoke, and finally director of research and planning at HMP Dartmoor).
Public life 2014-15, led independent review of Islamist extremism in prisons and probation, ordered by the then secretary of state, Michael Gove.
An appeals court has found in favour of Google after a man claimed the search engine had defamed him by publishing photos of him linked to hardened criminals of Melbourne’s underworld.
Milorad Trkulja sued Google, arguing when search terms such as Melbourne criminal underworld photos and Melbourne underworld criminals were entered, images of him showed up.
He argued the search results put him in the same league as convicted murderer Carl Williams, underworld killer Andrew “Benji” Veniamin and drug kingpin Tony Mokbel.
Google tried unsuccessfully to have the case against it set aside on the grounds it had no real prospect of success. It argued it could not be held to be the publisher of the search results, because they were produced by the automated operation of a vast web search based on algorithms. Further, it argued the search results were incapable of being found to have defamed Trkulja.
On Tuesday, Victoria’s court of appeal ruled Google’s appeal should be allowed. “The appeal has a real, not fanciful, prospect of success,” the judges said.
The judges held that, as the case was put, Google could not be held to be publisher of the allegedly defamatory material. They also found the material on which Trkulja sued was not capable of conveying any defamatory meanings.
The judges acknowledged Trkulja could have argued his case in a way that enabled the appeal judges to find Google did publish the material, but he did not.
They noted the chance for a search engine to produce results that could defame someone was “acute”. But if search engines were to have immunity from liability for defamation, it should come from the parliament rather than the courts, they said.
Article 50 of the Lisbon treaty holds the key to leaving the European Union but its full meaning and consequences are open to interpretation.
As the British courts prepare to decide whether the government must consult parliament before invoking Article 50, the EU is preparing its institutions for the coming negotiations.
So what is on the table? Who gets a say? And what will the coming years of negotiation hold?
Joining Jon Henley to discuss it all are Jolyon Maugham QC, a lawyer whose own crowdfunded challenge to the detail of Article 50 is bound for the Irish High Court, Professor Philip Syrpis, an expert in EU law at the University of Bristol, Guardian Brussels correspondent Jennifer Rankin, and our legal affairs correspondent Owen Bowcott.
Leave your thoughts below and get in touch with ideas, questions and suggestions for future episodes by emailing us: brexitpodcast@theguardian.com. Next time, we plan to examine the rights of EU nationals in the UK, and UK citizens living elsewhere in Europe. 
Previous episode: The Story So Far – Brexit Means... Podcast
The backlog of uncollected court fines and surcharges in England and Wales has risen to £747m, according to the latest Ministry of Justice figures.
The sharp rise in courtroom-imposed debt over the past two years is substantially due to the ill-fated criminal courts charge, which was introduced by the former justice secretary Chris Grayling and abandoned after less than eight months.
While the amount recovered by the department has risen significantly over recent years, convicted offenders are facing increased demands for punitive payments.
The £747m figure is the MoJ’s estimate up to the end of September 2016, and compares with £680m at the end of December 2015. It includes fines imposed in magistrates and crown courts, compensation orders, costs orders, criminal courts charges, victim surcharge orders, and unpaid fixed penalty notices and penalty notices for disorder that are registered as fines for enforcement.
Between the financial years 2011-12 and 201516, fines and charges imposed annually by courts in England and Wales rose from £385m to £598m. Over the same period, sums collected have risen from £279m to £381m a year.
The surge in uncollected debt was highlighted by the Liberal Democrats. Tim Farron, the party’s leader, said: “What’s deeply concerning is that the amount left uncollected by the government is £747m. This is a very worrying trend, and we need to increase collection rates.
“This is a sizeable sum of money that could, and should, have been put to good use by the state. Imagine how many schools or hospitals could be built or police officers, social workers or soldiers could be employed with that cash – it’s frankly scandalous.” 
Those convicted face a formidable array of financial penalties. Offenders not only have to shell out for any fines imposed on them, but they may have to meet the expense of Crown Prosecution Service costs and are also liable for the victim surcharge.
 Grayling introduced the criminal courts charge in April 2015. It required convicted criminals to pay an additional charge of between £150 and £1,200 towards the cost of their case.
The extra costs provoked mass protest resignations by magistrates who refused to impose the new charge. They argued that many defendants would never be able to pay their accumulated fines. In December last year Grayling’s successor, Michael Gove, abolished the criminal courts charge. The sums imposed during that eight-month period still appear as uncollected on MoJ records, however.
The victim surcharge, introduced in 2007, started off at a flat £15 but has been progressively raised so that it now stands at a maximum of £170. It may explain the fresh increase in uncollected courtroom debt over the past year.
Penelope Gibbs, a former magistrate who is director of the charity Transform Justice, said the steep rise in the backlog of uncollected fines may also be linked to an era of austerity that has left many defendants without the resources to pay.
She added: “Publicity over the imposition of the criminal court charge may have undermined the credibility of the whole system of fines.”
Ben Summerskill, director of the Criminal Justice Alliance, said: “The whole of HMCTS [Her Majesty’s Courts and Tribunal Service] is in chaos at the moment. There’s no question that the criminal courts charge imposed fines on people who had no means to pay them. 
“It was a quixotic attempt to square the public finances that was drawn up without any thought about its implementation.”
A spokesperson for HMCTS said: “We take the recovery and enforcement of court fines extremely seriously and our performance is improving. Last year we collected a record £381m – an increase of over £110m since 2010 – and the number of those fined not meeting their repayment terms has fallen by around a third in the last five years.”
Italian prosecutors: wrong man may have been arrested in smuggling case
The private security company G4S will have to foot the bill for the public sector Tornado special squads sent in to end the 12-hour riot at its Birmingham prison, the justice secretary has said.
An inquiry has been launched into one of the worst prison disturbances since the 1990 riots at Manchester’s Strangeways prison. After Friday’s events, 380 prisoners have been moved out of the wrecked wings of HMP Birmingham to other jails across England.
The dispersal of prisoners led to two incidents at Hull prison on Sunday and a further incident at Cardiff. The Prison Service’s “gold command” headquarters operation is remaining in place, monitoring all prisons in England and Wales for signs of potential unrest.
Liz Truss told MPs that insufficient staffing levels, a rise in new psychoactive drugs, gangs and bullying lay at the root of the Birmingham riot, adding they were common problems across public and private prisons: “The next few months will be difficult,” the justice secretary told MPs. “It will take time and concerted action, but I am confident we can turn this situation around.”
Labour MPs pressed Truss over whether warnings from the independent monitoring board at Birmingham had been acted on. They questioned her about the impact of a £700m budget cut and a reduction of 7,000 prison officers on the stability of the Prison Service.
Labour’s justice spokesman, Richard Burgon, said the riot should prompt the government to review the running of prisons by private companies such as G4S and Serco.
Truss said G4S would have to pay the cost of the public resources that were used, including 10 Tornado teams of highly trained officers deployed to retake control of the prison.
She told MPs that the Birmingham riot started at 9.15am on Friday, when six prisoners in N wing climbed on to netting. Truss said: “When staff intervened, one them had their keys snatched. At that point, staff withdrew for their own safety. Prisoners then gained control of the wing and subsequently of P wing.
“G4S immediately deployed two Tornado teams. At 11.29am, gold command was opened, and a further seven additional Tornado teams were dispatched to the prison. At 1.30pm, prisoners gained access to two more wings. Gold command made the decision that further reinforcements were needed and dispatched an additional four Tornado teams to the prison.”
She said that paramedics and staff tried to help an injured prisoner shortly after 3pm but were prevented from doing so and the afternoon was spent preparing to take back control of the wings.
“At 8.35pm, 10 Tornado teams of highly trained officers swept through the wings,” she said. “Shortly after 10pm, the teams had secured all four wings. The prisoner who had previously been reported injured was treated by paramedics and taken to hospital, along with two other prisoners.”
The inquiry into the prison riot will be carried out by Sarah Payne, an adviser to the chief inspector of probation and a former director of the Welsh Prison Service.
Although Truss repeatedly refused to confirm that she had read the Birmingham prison watchdog’s report in October, which warned of the need for urgent action to tackle understaffing and the spread of “black mamba” psychoactive drugs, she said the issues had been discussed with the prison governor.
The justice secretary’s Commons statement followed a renewed warning from the president of the independent monitoring board, John Thornhill, that insufficient staff numbers lay behind the rising levels of violence in prisons in England and Wales.
“It is the board’s view, echoed by prison staff, that there are insufficient staff numbers to deal with many of the day-to-day situations that occur in a local prison … The result, as we have seen in recent weeks, is an increase in riots that damage the system individuals,” he said.
“The impact of this unrestrained violence is that a large number of prisoners have to be transferred to other prisons that are already stretched with their own problems and staffing issues.”
Truss will publish a prison and courts bill in the new year to introduce wide-ranging reform and to build on the recruitment of 2.500 extra prison officers.
A California agency that oversees judicial discipline in the state says a judge committed no misconduct when he sentenced former Stanford University swimmer Brock Turner to six months in jail for sexually assaulting a young woman on campus.
The California commission on judicial performance ruled on Monday that there was no evidence that Santa Clara County judge Aaron Persky displayed bias in handing down a sentence decried as too lenient by critics across the country.
“The commission has concluded that there is not clear and convincing evidence of bias, abuse of authority, or other basis to conclude that Judge Persky engaged in judicial misconduct warranting discipline,” the 11-member panel concluded in its unsigned ruling.
Turner’s case exploded on social media and ignited a debate about campus rape and the criminal justice system after the victim’s 7,200-word letter that she read in the courtroom during sentencing was published online.
The commission said it received thousands of complaints and petitions regarding Persky and the sentence.
The petitions included complaints that Persky “displayed gender bias and failed to take sexual assault of women seriously”, and showed favoritism to Turner because the judge was a former Stanford athlete as well.
The 21-year-old was released from jail in September after serving three months. He will be on probation for three years in his native Ohio and is a registered sex offender.
Persky is the target of a recall campaign launched by Stanford law professor Michele Landis Dauber, who said in a statement on Monday that the recall effort would continue.
“This report simply highlights what we have been saying from the beginning,” the statement read, “which is that a petition for judicial discipline was not the correct venue to address these concerns, and the recall is the only realistic way to remove Judge Persky from office.”
“Judge Persky has a long record of failing to take violence against women seriously, and we will demonstrate that when we launch the campaign early next year,” Dauber said.
Turner was convicted of assaulting the woman behind a dumpster after they drank heavily at a fraternity party. The woman had passed out and Turner was on top of her when confronted by two graduate students passing by on bicycles. They chased and tackled him when he tried to flee, holding him on the ground until police arrived.
A jury in March found Turner guilty of three felony sexual assault counts. Persky sentenced him to six months in jail, citing the “extraordinary circumstances” of Turner’s youth, clean criminal record and other considerations in departing from the minimum sentence of two years in prison. Prosecutors had argued for six years.
There is little to be said for the strike stopping some customers getting their Christmas presents in the post, nor the ones threatened by British Airways cabin staff and baggage handlers at many of the UK’s airports that threaten long-planned festive breaks, nor for the long-running dispute that is making the lives of commuters in parts of south-east England so miserable. But they are not the start of a wild-eyed workers’ insurgency, as some overexcited reports have suggested in the past few days. Nor, whether or not they achieve their legitimate aim of protecting their members’ interests, are they helping the wider trade union movement to find a new relevance and authority as membership declines in a rapidly changing economy.
There will possibly be a third more days lost to strikes in 2016 than in 2015. But last year was exceptionally peaceful on the industrial front, the most peaceful since 2005. The total of lost days for 2016 is still historically low. The point of this unnecessary row is that in some quarters, although it would seem not in Downing Street, there is still an appetite for more union-bashing laws. Some backbenchers hanker after the ultimate objective of the anti-union right since the Trade Disputes Act of 1906 reversed the Taff Vale judgment, removing trade union immunity from damages – thus effectively making industrial action impossible. This is daft on every front, not least because there would be no majority for it in parliament; the government was forced to make serial concessions on the trade union act, which is due to come into force next March. It already significantly narrows the possibilities of a strike by requiring not only a majority in favour of strike action, but a turnout of at least 50% of those entitled to vote. If parliament approves more regulations next month, it will also ban strike action in “important public services”, including the railways, unless it is backed by more than 40% of those entitled to vote.
What workers need is not more legislation to curb trade unions, but a trade union movement that is modern and responsive to the needs of the world where most people work. Trade union members tend to be older, better off and work in the old public sector. In the private sector, union membership is below 15%. If unions can’t find a way to reach younger workers to whom the tradition of collective action is unfamiliar, they are doomed to a slow death. Half of all jobs growth is among the self-employed. This is an audience that is deterred rather than attracted by old white men sounding antagonistic towards their employers.
Last year the union Community, which has set out to recruit self-employed people as well as a wide range of other workers, conducted research that found, if offered help by a trade union, a mere 19% would sign up. Offered similar help from an independent source, 75% would take up the offer. The union’s latest project is with Indycube, an organisation that sets up co-work spaces in redundant offices. Community wants to offer the self-employed not traditional union services but advice on contracts or slow payers. Others look across the Atlantic to movements like the minimum wage campaign Fight for $15, which began with a trade unionist, David Rolf, and has become a nationwide social movement organising for decent pay in sectors like fast food and social care. Workers need a strong, clear voice as much now as they ever had.
Dogs are property and cannot be considered in the same vein as children, a Canadian judge has ruled, in a scathing decision that blasted a newly separated couple for a “ridiculous” attempt to use the court system to settle a custody dispute over two of their dogs.
The childless couple, who separated in April after 16 years of marriage, turned to the court system earlier this year to settle a row over where two of their three dogs would live.
The initial application to the court was made by the husband, who wanted to keep one of the couple’s dogs.
Lawyers for the wife – who pointedly described her estranged husband as a “cat person” in court documents – pushed the court to consider the matter as they would any other custody issue, urging the judge to allow the dogs, aged 9 and 2, to live with her and grant visitation rights to her husband.
Any similarity between children and pets was roundly rejected by the judge. “Many dogs are treated as members of the family with whom they live,” Justice Richard Danyliuk wrote in his decision, issued in August and which came to light this week after a report by the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. “But after all is said and done, a dog is a dog. At law it is property, a domesticated animal that is owned. At law it enjoys no familial rights.”
While he acknowledged that pets can differ from other property in that statutory protection exists to prevent them from being treated with cruelty or neglect, he drew the line at applying the principles of child custody to animals.
He pointed to the differences in how society treats dogs and children to explain his reasoning. “In Canada, we tend not to purchase our children from breeders,” he wrote. “In turn, we tend not to breed our children with other humans to ensure good bloodlines, nor do we charge for such services … When our children act improperly, even seriously and violently so, we generally do not muzzle them or even put them to death for repeated transgressions.”
Since the couple’s separation, the dogs – named Kenya and Willow, or Willy for short – have been staying with the parents of the wife.
For the time being, said the judge, the dogs should remain where they are. He likened the matter to being asked to rule on what the couple should do with other joint property they may own. “Am I to make an order that one party have interim possession of (for example) the family butter knives but, due to a deep attachment to both butter and those knives, order that the other party have limited access to those knives for 1.5 hours per week to butter his or her toast?” Justice Danyliuk wrote. “A somewhat ridiculous example, to be sure, but one that is raised in response to what I see as a somewhat ridiculous application.”
In a court system plagued with delays, where many are forced to wait months to hear applications relating to child welfare and other family matters, he slammed the couple for tying up valuable resources. While he was sure that the couple felt the living arrangement of their dogs was a “most important matter”, he urged them to consider the bigger picture. “To consume scarce judicial resources with this matter is wasteful.”
The couple was taking a substantial risk in pursuing this matter in court, he warned. “Both parties should bear in mind that if the court cannot reach a decision on where the dogs go, it is open to the court under the legislation to order them sold and the proceeds split – something I am sure neither party wants.”
Ultimately he dismissed the application, pressing the pair to sort out the dispute themselves and leave the court to other matters. “Simply put,” said the judge, “I am not about to make what amounts to a custody order pertaining to dogs.”
There is a contradiction in the argument that more prison officers will mean less trouble inside (Editorial, 19 December). The history of modern prison disturbances in England and Wales – from Parkhurst in 1969 through to Strangeways in 1990 – indicates that they occur for complex reasons. These prisons, and the others where disturbances have taken place in the last four decades, had their full complement of staff. Other disturbances occurred in prisons that were neither overcrowded nor privatised, and well-resourced financially. It is therefore crucial to get to the root of why prisoners revolt when they know, in Liz Truss’s cliched phrase, they “will face the full force of the law”. Prisoners knowing they faced the same consequences have not been deterred from revolting during this time. The point made by Frantz Fanon, cited by Black Lives Matter, can be applied to the prisons here: “We revolt simply because, for many reasons, we can no longer breathe”. Responding to what happened at Birmingham as a law and order issue, seeking retribution and dismissing critics as being pro-crime and anti-victim, will undoubtedly fail and have potentially catastrophic consequences for everyone inside.
Professor Joe Sim
School of Humanities and Social Science, Liverpool John Moores University
• Prisons are shameful places, often violent, dangerous and squalid. So of course they are a problem. But the real problem is not prisons but imprisonment, one endpoint in the criminal justice system. Prisons have no control over their own business. They simply have to do what they can with what the courts send them, and the courts send them what sentencing policy requires. Brave new thinking is needed. What is imprisonment supposed to achieve? If we know, are there better ways of achieving it? If sentences are needed, how long should they be? Liz Truss’s only response so far has been to recruit more prison officers, but doing that (even if she can) will address none of the confusions around imprisonment.
Michael Sheldon
Norwich
• Our prisons are full and the prospect of recruiting enough staff to properly look after prisoners is months, if not years, away. So we need to reduce the numbers in prison in England and Wales. Scotland has already succeeded in reducing numbers, but it needs political will. One issue to address is ever-longer prison sentences – in England and Wales we have fewer people going to prison, but their prison sentences are longer than 10 years ago for the same crimes. Yet there is no evidence that these longer sentences are either more effective or a deterrent. The reasons for sentence inflation are complex, but sentencing guidelines, the decline of sentence appeals and punitive rhetoric may all be to blame. The government could take action on all these without endangering public safety in any way.
Penelope Gibbs
Director, Transform Justice
• The Guardian was strangely muted at the time Chris Grayling was pushing through the privatisation of the probation service, as if you too were convinced it was failing and indifferent to its fate as a respected and necessary public body. It is good to see you acknowledge that this was a foreseeable catastrophe (Editorial, 16 November).
The service was not failing, and many of the problems it had were the consequence of sustained government mismanagement and misguided target-setting, rather than internal incompetence. There is a clear evidence base for doing probation well, and there were, back in 2014, a cohort of managers and officers perfectly capable of delivering this, although many have now left their broken and demoralised profession.
The community rehabilitation companies that took over the probation trusts have been short-changed, literally, by Grayling, who brazenly overestimated the numbers they would get to supervise in order to attract their business. “Payment by results” is a fiasco, and the companies cannot afford to keep their third-sector partners on board. They are not coming clean about all that is going wrong, some may break their contracts, and the Ministry of Justice is doing its level best to silence critics.
Could the Guardian now throw the weight of its investigative resources into exposing this catastrophe in full? Public safety has been jeopardised by it, but beyond the specifics of that, exposure would reveal – all cost-efficiency rhetoric apart – how cynical the motives and wasteful the methods of privatisation actually are.
Mike Nellis
Emeritus professor of criminal and community justice, University of Strathclyde
• Your otherwise excellent editorial outlining the disastrous consequences for offender rehabilitation of Chris Grayling’s political decision-making for ideological purposes falls into the trap of suggesting that probation was widely considered to be failing in 2012. This is not true, as the Ministry of Justice’s own 2013 report highlighted that the performance of the then 35 probation trusts was either good or excellent against the national target framework. Indeed, many trusts had also received national and international recognition for their business excellence. The truth is that from the creation of a National Probation Service in 2001, which retained its strong local accountability through local boards and then trusts, Labour and then the coalition administration were concerned with central control and the move to privatisation. As early as 2003, the Carter report recommended the segmentation of service delivery so that privatisation and central control of what remained could be facilitated. It is Labour’s 2007 Offender Management Act that has provided the basis for the folly of the Tories’ Transforming Rehabilitation.
Every single home secretary and justice secretary since 2001 has taken the opportunity to attack probation, whether it was John Reid describing it as not fit for purpose or Ken Clarke suggesting that the 2011 riots were the consequences of failed offender rehabilitation. The real issue is not one of supposed failure but why a public service with a proud 107-year history, respected and emulated across Europe and beyond, has been regularly attacked. I can only conclude that decency, compassion and humanity towards those who commit crimes and the belief that with sustained assistance people can turn their lives round is now too old-fashioned and stands in the way of profits for global businesses.
Steve Collett
Chief probation officer, Cheshire area 2001-10
• While I agreed with the majority of your editorial, it was, like the Grayling agenda which it criticised, based upon a false premise. It stated that “in 2012 the probation service was widely considered to be failing. Few questioned the need for reform”. This is completely incorrect on both points: firstly the majority of probation trusts in England and Wales had been performing extremely well, indeed had achieved standards of excellence at that time, and secondly there were large numbers of people and organisations, the majority experts in the field, questioning the need for the so-called Transforming Rehabilitation agenda, which Grayling bulldozed through without any evidence base.
Community sentences managed by probation services had achieved a lower conviction rate than custodial sentences. It was the short-term prison sentences which resulted in the highest reconviction rate, and at the time of Grayling’s intervention probation services had no remit, except in the 18-21 age group, to manage these on release. Grayling spoke of a “revolving door” of custody and destroyed probation for not reducing reoffending in a group that they were not tasked to work with. Probation services were carved up by Grayling and a large section sold off to private companies. He and his team also had no understanding of the dynamic nature of risk, and those assessed as low and medium risk of causing harm are placed with the private companies, and high risk with the civil service section of probation. Statistics show that the majority of serious further offences come from the low- to medium-risk groups, and serious case reviews have counselled against increasing the number of agencies involved with risky individuals and the communication problems caused. Several private companies have disposed of professionally trained staff, seeing them as too expensive.
Having worked as a probation officer from 1981 to 2014, I have been heartbroken to see the shambles that the world of probation has now become. Most of my contemporaries have now also left their jobs as workloads have increasingly become untenable. Younger colleagues have either left to work in new fields or are currently struggling on in very difficult circumstances. Workloads across the board have now become unmanageable. This is both due to high numbers and the nature of the caseloads, coupled with convoluted systems of communication between public and private sector.
Grayling has destroyed a high-performing service and a profession. The revolving door he spoke of between short-term prison sentences and reoffending just got faster.
Jan Clare
West Bridgford, Nottinghamshire
• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters
Italian prosecutors have suggested for the first time that a man accused of being one of the world’s most-wanted people smugglers may in fact be the victim of mistaken identity, in an embarrassing blow to a high-profile investigation led by Britain’s National Crime Agency.
In June, Italian and British officials claimed to have helped arrest Medhanie Yehdego Mered, one of the alleged masterminds behind the smuggling of thousands of people from north Africa to Europe.
After being extradited from Sudan to Italy, the alleged smuggler faced two prosecutions, first in Sicily and then in Rome, despite a series of Guardian articles that revealed doubts about the identity of the man in custody.
Six months later, some of the prosecutors have suggested that the wrong man may have been arrested, after the prosecution team in Rome broke ranks with their Sicilian colleagues. In a 23-page document submitted to court officials, the Rome prosecutors wrote: “This prosecution office have good grounds to state that the real physical aspect of Medhanie Yehdego Mered is the one shown in the attached photo,” referring to a picture of a man who differs substantially in appearance to the man in custody in Sicily.
To bolster their argument, the Rome prosecutors then cited testimony by a prosecution witness, an alleged former customer of Mered, who said the man in the photograph was the real smuggler, rather than the man on trial in Sicily. According to the prosecutors’ document, Seifu Haile, 28, said: “This is Medhanie [Mered]. He is the king in Libya, very respected by everyone.”
The document corroborates reporting by the Guardian, which suggests that the man in custody is in fact Medhanie Tesfarmariam Berhe, an Eritrean refugee with no connection to Mered’s alleged business. The Guardian has previously published testimony from other alleged Mered customers, all of whom said the Italian and British police had made a mistake. Mered has himself also said in Facebook messages published by the Guardian that the wrong man is on trial in his place.
The news causes considerable embarrassment for Britain’s NCA, GCHQ, and the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, all of whom played a part in the alleged smuggler’s arrest. Court documents show that the NCA’s representative in north Africa, Roy Godding, played a key role in the extradition, while the NCA boasted on its website in June that it had tracked Mered to an address in Khartoum. At the time, the FCO said its own role was crucial to proceedings.
Berhe remains in custody until at least 10 January, while a Sicilian court assesses the Rome prosecutors’ claims, which have been contested by their Sicilian counterparts. Asked about the case by the Guardian, the Sicilian prosecutors refused to comment.
The NCA said it was “confident in our intelligence”.
Berhe’s lawyer Michele Calantropo said: “The prosecutors in Palermo have [contested] the document produced by their colleagues in Rome. It’s very bizarre. And in the meantime an innocent man is going to spend Christmas in jail.”
On Monday, an Italian MP spoke out about the case for the first time, and announced a parliamentary inquiry. Erasmo Palazzotto, a leftwing MP and vice-president of the national commission for foreign affairs, said he hoped the inquiry would “accelerate the investigation and make sure that we are not keeping in jail an innocent man that might be the victim of a mistaken identity”.
When Donald Trump swears at the inauguration that he will “faithfully execute the office of president of the United States, and will to the best of my ability, preserve, protect and defend the constitution of the United States”, he will be committing a violation of constitutional magnitude.
The US constitution flatly prohibits any “Person holding any Office of Profit or Trust under [the United States]” from accepting “any present, Emolument, Office, or Title, of any kind whatever, from any King, Prince, or foreign State”. 
Known as the emoluments clause, this provision was designed on the theory that a federal officeholder who receives something of value from a foreign power can be tempted to compromise what the constitution insists be his exclusive loyalty: the best interest of the United States. The clause applies to the president and covers even ordinary, fair market value transactions with foreign states and their agents that result in any profit or benefit. That a hostile government has gotten its money’s worth from our president is obviously no defense to a charge that he has abused his office. 
Trump’s continued interest in the Trump Organization and his steady stream of monetary and other benefits from foreign powers put him on a collision course with the emoluments clause. Disentangling every improper influence resulting from special treatment of Trump’s business holdings by foreign states would be impossible. The American people would be condemned to uncertainty, leaving our political discourse rife with accusations of corruption. These problems are exacerbated by the fact that Trump has regularly declined to make his business dealings or tax returns transparent.
Thus a specter of skewed incentives will haunt a Donald Trump presidency. 
While much has changed since the constitution was written, certain premises of politics and human nature have held steady. Among them is that private financial interests can subtly sway even the most virtuous leaders. As Alexander Hamilton wrote in Federalist 22: “One of the weak sides of republics, among their numerous advantages, is that they afford too easy an inlet to foreign corruption.” The framers sought to avoid these ends by avoiding these beginnings, writing a broad ban on potentially corrupting foreign influence into article I of our nation’s charter.
By imposing clear limitations, the clause avoids situations in which the American people must search for hints of improperly motivated presidential favoritism toward selected foreign powers, or of foreign attempts to seduce the American president into compromising our national interest for his private profit. 
With Trump, this search has already begun. His global business empire creates ideal conditions for ongoing violations of the emoluments clause. Mere weeks before Trump spoke by phone with the president of Taiwan – a dramatic departure from America’s “one China” policy – a businesswoman associated with his conglomerate reportedly arrived in Taiwan to inquire about major new investments in luxury hotels. Trump’s businesses owe hundreds of millions to Deutsche Bank, which is currently negotiating a multibillion-dollar settlement with the US Department of Justice – a settlement that will now be overseen by an attorney general selected by and serving at the pleasure of Trump.
In his last public press conference, Trump called on Russia to hack Hillary Clinton and release her personal emails. Recently, both the FBI and CIA determined that the highest levels of Russia’s government in fact ran a covert operation aimed at helping Trump’s campaign, making his victory in the electoral college more likely.
The bottom line is simple: Trump stands to benefit personally, in innumerable and largely hidden ways, from decisions made daily by foreign governments and their agents. History teaches that leaders with divided interests cannot be counted on to faithfully serve those who elected them. 
The framers understood this lesson. The emoluments clause was forged of their hard-won wisdom. No relic of a bygone era, it is a profound expression of insight into the nature of the human condition and the preconditions of sovereign self-government. 
Trump’s shifting proposals for addressing his multifarious conflicts of interests are simply inadequate. If he retains an ownership interest in his empire, his personal bottom line is necessarily affected by everything his business does, whether or not he is at the helm.
Nor is a supposedly “blind trust” involving control of Trump’s assets by his adult children remotely sufficient. It is inconceivable that he could avoid discussing with them at least some matters relating to his policies and their business ventures, or that he could avoid noticing and caring about their interactions with foreign nations. 
So even full divestment of his personal ownership and control of the Trump Organization is no remedy for his emoluments clause violation: it is often to the prince and not the king that special favors are done.
Because Trump would take office in blatant violation of the constitution, the electoral college would be fully justified in concluding that he is unsuited to the presidency. As Justice Robert Jackson wrote 64 years ago, electors must be considered free to vote their conscience.
If Trump deliberately declines to cure his continuing violation of the emoluments clause upon entering office, Congress has both power and responsibility to enforce the constitution. It would be well within its rights to impeach and remove him for engaging in “high crimes and misdemeanors”.
Short of that awesome step, Congress might set lasting, bipartisan precedent by requiring all presidents to divest assets that risk conflicts of interest and to place the proceeds in a truly blind trust, and by creating a private cause of action explicitly allowing competitors disadvantaged by the president’s acceptance of unlawful benefits to file emoluments clause suits against the president in his personal capacity.
The looming constitutional shadow cast by a Trump presidency poses a frightening risk to our national security and gravely disserves the people of the United States.
Indian police are torturing suspects – including using sexual abuse, forms of waterboarding and beatings with a “truth-seeking belt” – a Human Rights Watch investigation has claimed.
A report released by the rights group on Monday says more than 590 suspects died in police custody between 2010 and 2015, and though mistreatment was alleged in many cases, no police officers have been convicted in that time.
Rules intended to curb the number of deaths in custody, such as bringing a suspect before a magistrate within 24 hours of their arrest, were routinely ignored, it says.
In one case highlighted in the report, police said a man named Shyamu Singh killed himself in custody in April 2012. But his brother, who was also arrested, told investigators the pair were held down by four officers while another “poured water down my nose continuously”.
“Once they stopped on me, they started on Shyamu,” he said. “Shyamu fell unconscious. So they started worrying and talking among themselves that he is going to die. One of the men got a little packet and put the contents in Shyamu’s mouth.”
Police told Singh’s family that he had died by consuming poison. An internal investigation cleared police of any involvement in his death, but an initial inquiry by state authorities concluded that seven police officers had tortured and poisoned the 35-year-old to death. Nonetheless, all seven were exonerated in the final report.
In another case, one of 17 featured in the report, a police head constable admitted that a suspect in a counterfeiting investigation had been beaten with a satyashodhak patta, or “truth-seeking belt”.
“Since he was a hardcore criminal, he refused to give any information on the source of those fake currency notes seized from him. But it was essential to get that information from him,” Atmaram Gurav is quoted as saying in the report.
“He was so weak after the beating that when he got up to drink water, he was dizzy with pain and collapsed against the window, breaking his lower jaw.”
Procedures to investigate deaths in custody are regularly flouted, the report says. Less than a third of the 97 deaths in 2015 led to a judicial inquiry, and in 26 cases no autopsy was conducted.
The New York-based rights group says there are police oversight bodies to investigate such cases, but they have “largely failed” in their role.
More than 430 cases of deaths in police custody were reported to India’s National Human Rights Commission between April 2012 and June 2015. The NHRC recommended more than a total of 22m rupees (£260,000) compensation in the cases, but no prosecutions.
“Police in India will learn that beating suspects to confess is unacceptable only after officers are prosecuted for torture,” said Meenakshi Ganguly, Human Rights Watch’s south Asia director.
The report makes several recommendations including that India set up a witness protection programme to encourage victims of police violence to come forward without fear of retribution.
Italian prosecutors: wrong man may have been arrested in smuggling case
France is considering appointing an official internet ombudsman to regulate complaints about online material in order to prevent excessive censorship and preserve free speech.
A bill establishing a “content qualification assessment procedure” has been tabled in the French senate and the initiative was debated last week at a high level meeting attended by senators and judges as well as policy officers from Google and Twitter.
The aim is to provide a simple procedure that will support firms operating online who are uncertain of their legal liabilities and to prevent over-zealous removal or censorship of material merely because it is the subject of a complaint. It could be copied by other European jurisdictions.
Dan Shefets, a Danish lawyer who works in Paris has developed the proposal with the French senator Nathalie Goulet, said: “The problem which an internet ombudsman addresses applies to all countries in Europe [because] member states have to work with the e-commerce directive.
“According to the directive, internet service providers (ISPs) face both penal and civil liability as soon as they are made aware of allegedly illicit content. One consequence of such liability is that smaller companies take down such content for fear of later sanctions.
“The risk to freedom of speech is real and significant as a consequence not only of the directive, but also of growing pressure on ISPs all over Europe and the world for that matter”.
The idea is that a rapid response from the internet ombudsman, whose office would need to be appropriately staffed, would either order the material to be taken down or allow it to remain. As long as ISPs complied with the rulings, they would not face any fine or punishment.
David Wright, of the UK Safer Internet Centre, said the closest existing model was Australia’s e-safety commissioner which provides a complaints service for children experiencing cyber-bullying.
Shefets, who founded the Association for Accountability and Internet Democracy (AAID) in 2014, is also working with Unesco to develop the project particularly to deal with material deemed to be encouraging radicalisation.
He is also planning to present his scheme to the parliamentary assembly of the Council of Europe. Shefets became interested in regulating online complaints after taking a case against Google in 2014 which resulted in the US firm being fined €1,000 a day until an online defamatory article was removed.
He believes an internet ombudsman will help smaller companies that cannot afford large legal departments to assess the risks of material they host online. “It would help them compete against the big players, who already have massive legal departments and access to lawyers without any financial difficulties,” he explained.
“If we don’t put in place some sort of mechanism which will protect freedom of speech while at the same time increasing accountability, it will be too easy to justify repressive [legislative] regimes.”
Letters: Muslim wives in particular are usually not aware that their ‘marriage’ has no legal status until the relationship breaks down
The riot in Birmingham prison last Friday, which at its height involved more than a third of the prison’s 1,450 inmates, was the worst since the Strangeways riot in Manchester 26 years ago. Moving the perpetrators out of Birmingham so that repairs can begin has put the stability of other prisons on a knife edge. As the justice secretary, Liz Truss, who will make a statement to MPs on Monday, acknowledged last month when she announced that an extra 2,500 officers were to be recruited, many of Britain’s prisons are dangerously understaffed and experiencing unprecedented levels of violence; Birmingham’s annual monitoring report emphasised just those problems. This crisis, like other crises in the public services, has been years in the making. As Britain enters its seventh year of austerity, there is no respite in sight. But prisons offer a real chance to show how to do more with less.
The chairman of the parole board, Nick Hardwick, who was until January the chief inspector of prisons, warned in a BBC interview on Sunday that the current balance between prison population and the number of officers was unworkable, and that on their own the new officers were not enough. More than 7,000 prison officers have gone since 2010 when Ken Clarke became justice secretary and promised a revolution in rehabilitation. Mr Clarke wanted shorter sentences – he proposed halving the sentences of offenders who entered guilty pleas – and a cut in reoffending, to reduce the prison population by 3,000. He offered up cuts of £2bn to the Treasury, nearly a quarter of the department’s £9bn budget; and by early 2013 the figures showed the first fall in prison numbers since the 1990s. But by then Mr Clarke had been replaced by Chris Grayling, with a brief to be tough on punishment, and numbers started to rise again, without any reverse to the shrinking budgets.
After Mr Grayling came Michael Gove, who spoke persuasively about the need for reform. But there was no change in the state of Britain’s prisons – now routinely condemned by the prisons inspectorate, who describe crumbling buildings and rat and cockroach infestations. There are not enough staff, and many are relatively new recruits, so in most jails few prisoners are constructively occupied; many are locked up almost all day, every day. In the year to June, 105 inmates killed themselves. At the same time there is a huge increase in the availability of psychoactive drugs, sometimes flown in by drones, that greatly exacerbate levels of violence. In the words of Peter Clark, Mr Hardwick’s successor as chief inspector, in his first annual report, “the grim situation [described in Mr Hardwick’s last report] has not improved, and in some key areas it has, if anything, become even worse”.
This is the mess that Liz Truss inherited when she was made justice secretary by Theresa May in July. Last month she unveiled a modest plan for reform, and some experts applaud her efforts to get a grip on a fast-deteriorating situation. She persuaded the chancellor, Philip Hammond, to release the cash for the extra staff announced in November. But they will take months to recruit and train – and, as the weekend’s events show, time is one of the commodities she does not have. In those circumstances, she was ill-advised, when she launched her prison reform white paper in early November, to rule out reviving the changes that Mr Clarke was forced to drop four years ago.
She expressly ruled out what she called “arbitrary reductions” to the prison population. That sounds as if she is resisting the demand now made by every one of her predecessors since 2005 to review the cases of the more than 3,000 offenders held on indeterminate sentences for public protection, even though some were originally imprisoned for minor offences and have been detained for far longer than the maximum sentence. Instead she restates the official line that reducing reoffending is the way to cut prisoner numbers. That is a pledge which sounds increasingly hollow in the face of the chief inspector of probation’s criticism last week of some of the private providers who run probation services.
In the Commons Ms Truss will almost certainly pledge to bring down the full force of the law against inmates involved in the Birmingham riot. But that means more prisoners in prison for longer – and the cost is high, yet the regime that is threatening the stability of many more prisons remains unchanged. Almost all prisons are operating at or near 100% capacity. This is just not sustainable. Ms Truss must think again about early release. Prison isn’t working.
Hull prison is on the brink of riot and has been put on lockdown after CCTV cameras were allegedly set alight by 15 inmates who took part in the large-scale disorder at HMP Birmingham, the chair of the Prison Officers’ Association has said. 
Mike Rolfe said trouble flared after the prisoners arrived at the category B jail from the Midlands. “We understand 15 prisoners were transferred to Hull and one of those prisoners, thought to be involved in inciting the riots along with others at Birmingham, assaulted a senior officer yesterday,” Rolfe told the Guardian.
The Prison Officers’ Association claimed that inmates at HMP Hull were under lockdown, with only a few allowed out of their cells at a time. The union said CCTV cameras were set on fire and that some inmates had refused to return to their cells after the arrival of the 15 men.
Rob Nicholson, chairman of the Hull branch of the Prison Officers’ Association, told the Hull Daily Mail: “It is a powder keg and it’s waiting to go off. They are trying to incite riots and we’ve had a really bad couple of days here. I’ve spoken to very experienced prison officers this morning and they tell me they fear for their safety.”
Nicholson added: “They were put in one unit, which beggars belief. We wouldn’t have expected the majority of people who have come from a disturbance to be put in the one room, but that was the decision that was taken.
“For me and my members, it was a ludicrous decision. They set fire to the cameras just after they got here and a senior officer was assaulted by, we believe, one of the main instigators of what happened in Birmingham.”
A Ministry of Justice source disputed claims that the prison was on lockdown. He said one prisoner had tried to damage a CCTV camera, but denied that several had been set alight. “A few prisoners were unhappy about being moved and there was a minor altercation, but this was dealt with well by the staff,” the source said.
A Ministry of Justice spokesman said: “HMP Hull, like all prisons across the estate, is being closely monitored for signs of potential unrest. That includes managing the transfer of prisoners in the interests of maintaining safe, calm and normal regimes. We have specially trained prison staff available to respond to any disturbances.” 
The disturbance at Hull follows the 12-hour riots at HMP Birmingham on Friday, described as the worst prison riot since Strangeways 25 years ago.
Karl Turner, the Labour MP for Hull East, said: “I have it on good authority that Hull prison is on the brink of a riot. And clearly, this chaos has been caused by the government, no one else. Since 2010, they’ve slashed the numbers of prison officers by 7,000 and, clearly, the prison system cannot cope. They’re replaced highly experienced prison officers with people who are inexperienced in order to save cash.
“This chaos has been caused by the government and Liz Truss needs to do more to resolve the issue. They need to put money into the prison system urgently and they need to recruit … It’s not good enough for the coalition to sack 7,000 experienced officers and then announce the recruitment of 2,500 between now and 2020. This chaos is entirely made by the government. It’s the government policy – cut now and think later – that’s failed prison officers and prisons.”
Chibundu Onuzo seems to think that it was appropriate for a nurse to ask patients, on their way to surgery, if she could pray with them (I’m invisible – I am a Christian, 13 December). I put the question to my elderly friends. The majority said that it would terrify them at a particularly vulnerable time as they would assume that the nurse expected them to die. Some said they would be angry at such an inappropriate question in a hospital. One commented that he had previously been approached by a hospital chaplain and, far from being comforted, was shocked that the NHS was paying the chaplain’s wages when it had had cut nursing staff.
To inflict your own beliefs on someone who cannot get away from you and at such a tense time is unprofessional in the extreme. Everyone is entitled to practise their own belief in their private life, but forcing it on others in the work environment is simply wrong.
Dorothy Smith
Welwyn Garden City
• The Darent Valley hospital board will waste a lot of NHS money on lawyers’ fees by sacking a good nurse, Sarah Kuteh, in a cruel manner. All she did was to ask patients if they would like prayer support. She was not thrusting her Christian views on them. Perhaps the hospital chaplain team could act as advocates between the board and Sarah before this escalates into an unnecessary expensive and wasteful court case. How about doing this before Christmas?
Eddie James
Rillington, North Yorkshire
• It is sad that Sarah Kuteh lost her job after offering to pray with patients. Generally I feel that, as with politics, religion should be avoided in the workplace. Someone is going to be offended or feel excluded, so best not. If hospital admission forms still list religion, patients could then be informed what services are available, hospital chaplain etc.
Going into surgery affects people in different ways – pre-meds make me sleepy and I prefer to be left alone – but if someone needs prayer before then, best to discuss that at time of admission.
Val Cook
Radcliffe-on-Trent, Nottinghamshire
• Chibundu Onuzo complains of invisibility. How strange! For consider. There is a church in every village and district – often several. There are bishops in the House of Lords. There are church schools round every corner – with more to come. There are prayers in parliament and council meetings. There is the priority that schools give to religious perspectives on morals and belief; perspectives to which most of us are now indifferent or hostile. And then there is Thought for the Day – still closed to non-religious voices.
It’s an odd kind of invisibility that is quite so visible. And an odd kind of believer who feels that it’s not enough.
David Flint
Vice-chair, North London Humanist Group
• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters
Charles Dickens was outraged by child labour and for good reason: he had first hand experience of working long hours for little pay in bad conditions.
By the time Dickens came to chronicle his childhood experiences during the 1820s in David Copperfield, the first steps had been taken to end the exploitation of children by unscrupulous employers. There was a parliamentary inquiry in 1832 followed by legislation the following year so that a child working in a textile mill could work no more than an eight-hour day.
That was almost two centuries ago, yet in parts of the world child labour is still rife. There has been much discussion during 2016 about the effects of globalisation, almost all of it focused on problems it has caused for those struggling in developed countries.
But globalisation is a two-way street. At one end there’s the factory worker thrown on the scrapheap because it is cheaper to outsource production to a low-wage country. At the other there are workers making the trainers and the T-shirts. And many of them are children who should be playing with toys rather than making them. In the west, a company would never survive the public opprobrium following revelations that children as young as 10 were working 45-hour weeks.
Multinational corporations know that consumers are not especially keen on child exploitation in developing countries either, so many of them have signed codes of practice designed to ensure that children are not going through the sort of experiences suffered by Dickens in the 1820s.
That, though, is the reality according to a new report that looks at the link between child labour and education in the slums of one city – Dhaka, the capital of Bangladesh. The findings are worrying.
Bangladesh has a good record on human development. Poverty levels have fallen and it is close to getting every child in primary school. It has taken steps to achieve gender equity. Put simply, plenty of countries could learn some lessons from Bangladesh.
But the report written by Maria Quattri and Kevin Watkins for the UK thinktank, the Overseas Development Institute, found that child labour was rife in the slums, in part because families were desperate for the extra income their children were bringing in and in part because the poor quality of education meant dropout rates were high.
Dhaka is one of the world’s fastest growing mega cities. Migration from rural areas to the cities has been a big part of Bangladesh’s economic development, but urbanisation has been accompanied by rapid growth in slums.
The ODI study looked at slums in eight of Dhaka’s administrative units drawing on a large sample of 2,700 households in which children as well as adults took part.
It found a high incidence of children working from the ages of six to 14, with an average rate of 15% from across the eight survey sites. Another 15% were neither in school nor working. The overwhelming majority of working children were out of the school.
There are globally agreed rules drawn up by a UN body, the International Labour Organisation, governing the employment of children, and these make a distinction between child work and child labour.
Convention 138 allows children from the age of 13 (12 in the poorest countries) to do light work provided it doesn’t affect their attendance at school. Light work means work that is not hazardous – such as working down a mine, on a construction site or operating a machine in a factory – up to a maximum of 14 hours a week.
Writing in the Observer, a group of academics voiced opposition to calls from the UN for tougher action to stop children working, saying that the focus should instead be to avoid dangerous occupations and exploitation.
But the ODI study revealed that almost all the working children in the Dhaka slums were involved in what the ILO would classify as child labour, with hazardous work featuring prominently. Almost all were working more than 42 hours a week, with child labour levels rising steadily from 8% at the age of 10 to 45% by 14. Two-thirds of girl child labourers were employed making clothes, a big export earner for Bangladesh, which has an estimated 7,000 garment factories, employing about 5 million workers. 
Some of these are direct suppliers for foreign brands. They tend to be the bigger operations, but they sub-contract work to a large – less well policed – informal sector. 
“We do not state outright that named foreign brands can be linked to factories employing child labour,” the ODI report says. “However, it stretches credibility to assume that the supply chains for these brands do not include significant employment of child labourers.
“First, with over 60% of working girls and 13% of working boys reporting employment in the garment sector, this is the single largest source of employment in our sample. Second, the operations of direct and indirect exporters, and formal and informal suppliers, are deeply integrated. Widespread sub-contracting renders it highly probable that children are producing clothing destined for international supply chains.”
Children are driven into work by necessity. Poor families send their sons and daughters out to work to make ends meet: the survey found that the wages earned by children equalise the average incomes of households with and without working children.
The ODI report found that children are entering the labour market having had on average four years of schooling, typically of a poor quality. Basic literacy and numeracy skills are low, meaning that the children who drop out of school are on course for a life in lowly-paid jobs.
There are obvious ways of tackling child labour in Dhaka’s slums. The government could provide more effective enforcement to ensure compulsory primary education. It could raise its spending on education from 3% of national output, a level well below that in sub-Saharan Africa. It could raise the school leaving age. It could introduce a system of cash transfers that would compensate households for the foregone wages of their children, which average $47 a month for those aged six to 14.
One thing is certain: Bangladesh will pay a price if it fails to crack down on child labour. It is recognised that having a well-educated workforce is vital for economic development, which is why the UN has made universal secondary education one of its sustainable development goals to be achieved by 2030. This won’t happen in Bangladesh (and plenty of other countries) without a stronger commitment to eradicating child labour, which in turn means free, compulsory education for those aged six to 14.
It might also be time for western companies, governments and consumers to ask themselves a simple question: if child labour was wrong in the London of the 1820s, what makes it right in the Dhaka of the 2010s?
Thousands of people are being made homeless every year because they cannot find lawyers to help them resist eviction, charities are warning.
Even though legal aid is available to help anyone in danger of losing their home, there has been an 18% decline in the number of challenges brought, at a time of record repossessions in the private rental market.
The latest figures, highlighted by the Legal Action Group (LAG) and the homeless charity Shelter, reinforce warnings by the Law Society that “advice deserts”, where few, if any, lawyers are left in practice who are capable of dealing with legal aid housing cases, are emerging across England and Wales.
Last year, 42,728 households in rented accommodation were forcibly removed, according to Ministry of Justice figures. That number has risen by 53% since 2010 and now stands at an all-time high.
Deep cuts to other forms of housing legal aid introduced by the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders (LASPO) Act 2012, bureaucratic obstructions and poor hourly rates have progressively driven most lawyers specialising in housing out of the market, leaving few practitioners.
“People on low incomes facing homelessness and eviction are struggling to get the local face-to-face advice they desperately need and are entitled to by law,” the LAG’s latest report says. The 18% decrease, recorded in official MoJ figures, is in the three months of April to June this year compared with the same quarter the previous year.
There are some areas of the country, such as Suffolk and Shropshire, where there is no housing legal aid expert operating at all, the LAG points out. “Too often, lack of any early intervention funding not only ties [lawyers’] hands, but makes it impossible to either identify clients for whom a ‘stitch in time’ might work, or deliver the outcomes that can help to avoid litigation.”
One housing solicitor said: “It’s impossible to separate the cuts to legal aid from the cuts to the benefits system. The bedroom tax and Atos disability reassessments all feed into problems we deal with, such as homelessness. Because we can’t do benefits work any more, it’s harder for us to nip problems in the bud. We’re forced to take action at a much later stage, which will ultimately cost the government a lot more.”
Steve Hynes, the LAG’s director, told the Guardian: “Due to civil legal aid and other spending cuts, people with common civil legal problems such as difficulties paying the rent or claiming benefits have nowhere to turn.
“The reduction in civil legal aid services has gone beyond what the government originally intended. Civil legal aid services are in freefall, with solicitor firms and advice agencies closing.
“The government need to use the recently announced review of the LASPO Act to rethink providing early advice in cases, as too often help is only given when costly court-based solutions are the only option.”
The number of all legal aid advice cases has dropped by 75% following the LASPO cuts in April 2013 and is continuing to fall.
John Gallagher, principal solicitor at the homelessness charity Shelter, said: “We have housing officers in 17 locations across the country and some of them are the only source of legal assistance in their areas.
“In many areas there are only two or three providers of legal help. Some problems are, at root, to do with benefits but we can only claim for work on repossessions.”
Gallagher said there was a large amount of “unmet need” with claimants who are technically “in scope” – entitled to receive legal aid – but who cannot find specialist lawyers to help them with their cases. Thousands of people in such a situation are probably losing their homes every year, he said.
Lawyers who work on housing legal aid cases are paid at the rate of £57 an hour, rising to £63 if they appear in court. “That may not initially sound a bad return,” Gallagher explained. “But it has not gone up for 15 or 20 years and lawyers have to pay all their overheads. It’s just not viable in some places.”
The Legal Aid Agency has made the process of obtaining funding increasingly complex and difficult, Gallagher added. “There are people who because of want of legal representation lose their homes because they don’t know what to say in court.”
The Law Society, which represents solicitors across England and Wales, has campaigned to raise awareness of the advice deserts. Earlier this summer Catherine Dixon, the organisation’s chief executive, warned: “Advice on housing is vital for people who are facing eviction, the homeless and those renting a property in serious disrepair. Early legal advice on housing matters can make the difference between a family being made homeless or not.
“People who require legal aid advice for housing issues often need it urgently,” she said. “Families are unable to access justice because they cannot afford to travel to see the one provider in their area who may be located long distances from where they live.”
A Ministry of Justice spokesman said: “We have a world-leading legal system, and last year spent more than £1.5bn on legal aid.
“We must ensure legal aid is sustainable and fair - both for those who need it and the taxpayer who pays for it. That is why we have made sure support remains available to the most vulnerable and in the most serious cases.
“We have committed to carrying out a post-implementation review of the civil legal aid changes and an announcement on this will be made in due course.”
A group of international academics has condemned a United Nations convention which bans child labour as “harmful and unnecessary”, arguing that allowing young children to work can have positive effects which are not being taken into account.
In a controversial letter to the Observer, the researchers, who all work in the fields of child development or human rights, say the UN committee on the rights of the child has ignored available evidence in favour of outdated and ill-informed western prejudices and policies which can have a negative impact on the ground.
Across the globe, 193 countries have committed to ending child labour by 2025 under the UN’s sustainable development goals. But the academics want the existing minimum age (15 in some countries, 18 in others), to be abandoned, arguing that “age-appropriate” work can be beneficial for children in both the developing and the developed worlds and gives poor children a chance to improve their lives.
One of the signatories, Dr Dorte Thorsen of the school of global studies at the University of Sussex, said: “Banning children from work doesn’t bring them back into school; in fact, it might do the opposite if they were working to pay their school fees.
“For some children it’s a matter of rational economics. We have years of evidence that show that work doesn’t end a childhood and often can enhance it, can create a solidarity. In some countries in Africa, and in India, we are seeing collectivisation movements of child workers, a unionisation where they are trying to participate in politics, be heard, as opposed to this being a story of victimisation and oppression.”
Thorsen criticised the Department for International Development minister Priti Patel for pressuring British companies to scrutinise their supply chains for evidence of child labour, a task Thorsen says they are unlikely to have the competence to perform properly.
The experts also pointed to the setting up of schools in some countries for employees, which had then closed after pressure from the international campaign against child labour. Other children, they said, have been forced into hazardous, dangerous or illegal work because more regulated employment became closed to them.
Richard Carothers, a Toronto-based child development expert at the International Child Protection Network, said: “The hard-headed attitude of the big bureaucratic international agencies, immediately putting kids out of work because they think they should be playing football instead, is definitely not the way to approach this. Children need to be protected from nasty situations, and there is a debate about whether the percentage of working children in nasty situations is a small percentage or a very small percentage, but in no way does fixating on an age limit help kids in situations where they are being harmed.”
He said that UN officials should listen to children’s views. “How do they want things changed for them? How do we change things for working children? We need to be developing far more nuanced policy, more sophisticated understanding. Once a country ratifies a UN convention, then this translates into national law, and that’s it. Too simplistic. It’s damaging. We have case study after case study where children and their families have been damaged.”
Mélanie Jacquemin, a sociologist from the University of Marseille, is now in the Côte d’Ivoire, researching stories of children and adults who have migrated from village to city as children to find work. She said the stereotypes of exploited children were the exception.
“Yes, some child workers are in harsh situations. They are not matching the standards we have for decent work at all, they can be exploited and sometimes they are overworked. And of course if someone has your passport and you are deprived of your liberty and in a slavery situation, then this is a very important issue – trafficking does exist.
“But all the studies have shown that, although important morally, these cases are very much a minority issue compared with the great majority of children who are working under decent conditions, particularly here in west Africa.”
Young workers need help to avoid pitfalls, she said, and children, whether in Africa or Europe, will sometimes go and expose themselves to risk and be exploited. But banning work represented a grave error by big international agencies, she said, and was a decision based on “extremes of experiences that don’t cover the experiences of real people living and learning”.
The UN committee on the rights of the child did not respond to requests for comment.
Letters: Muslim wives in particular are usually not aware that their ‘marriage’ has no legal status until the relationship breaks down
When Seeta Kaur arrived in India with her children for a three-week visit to her husband’s relatives she was determined that when she returned to Britain it would be with both the sons who had accompanied her.
Since giving birth to the boys, who were aged 10 and two when they travelled to India, Seeta had confided in her family and close friends about the domestic abuse she suffered at the hands of her husband, Pawan, for resisting his demands to give one of them away.
Pawan, an Indian national, lived with Seeta and their four children (they also had two daughters) in Edmonton, north London, where she was born and raised. He wanted his brother and sister-in-law in India to have one of their sons because they could not have children of their own and, at the end of the trip, threatened to leave one of them behind.
Informal inter-family adoptions are not uncommon in India, because of an inefficient and disorganised legal adoption system. According to the government’s own figures, 3,000 children were adopted formally in the country last year, while there are an estimated 30 million orphans in the country.
Swinder Singh, Seeta’s sister, said: “She was open with us about the volatile relationship with her husband and the huge pressure she was under to give one of her sons away, which he had made a matter of family honour. She was a British woman and the idea horrified her.”
On 31 March last year, Pawan phoned Seeta’s family in north London to tell them she had died of a heart attack at her in-laws’ home in Kurukshetra in the north Indian state of Haryana.
They flew to India and began to suspect she was the victim of an “honour” killing when they saw bruising around Seeta’s neck and upper chest as she lay in her coffin. They announced their plan to take her back to Britain the following morning for a postmortem … but awoke to discover that Seeta had been cremated while they slept. When the case was closed by Indian police without a full investigation, Seeta’s family turned to the Metropolitan police for help, but say they were initially told that British officers had no jurisdiction to investigate because the alleged crime took place abroad.
The Foreign and Commonwealth Office said it could not get involved, or help secure the return of Seeta’s four children, who remain in India with their father, despite the high court ordering their return in April last year.
The family’s fight is now being led by the women’s group Southall Black Sisters, who have amassed a dossier of evidence and launched a “Justice for Seeta” campaign. They are backed by Kate Osamor, the family’s local MP, and Naz Shah, who has led the fight for justice for Samia Shahid, the Bradford woman killed in Pakistan last July.
They are calling for the Metropolitan police to look into Seeta’s case, and demanding new legislation that would make it easier to investigate “honour” killings of British citizens abroad, claiming a legal grey area is letting perpetrators evade justice. Pragna Patel, director of Southall Black Sisters, said: “Men are taking women abroad and getting away with honour crimes because the law is not clear on what exactly is the duty of British authorities to investigate them.”
Describing the current situation as a “lottery”, she cited cases such as that of Madeleine McCann and missing toddler Ben Needham as proof that British police are willing to investigate crimes abroad in some instances. “Clearly, when there are non-white Britons involved and it’s an ‘honour’ crime, then there appears to be a dereliction of duty on the part of the British police. This is what has happened in Seeta’s case, because we have collected concrete evidence and yet the Metropolitan police have not acted upon it.”
This evidence includes 26 witness statements from friends and relatives with details of the abuse they say she suffered for opposing her husband. One of her closest friends testified that, ahead of the trip to India, Seeta confided to her that she feared for her life. It was also said that the couple had a heated argument on the night she died. Medical reports showed that Seeta, aged 33, had no condition to explain a heart attack.
Shamik Dutta, solicitor for Seeta’s family, said: “A new law which recognises the international nature of honour killing would help families secure justice and act as a deterrent against such offences.”
The dossier compiled by campaigners was sent to the Metropolitan police in August, but no response has yet been received. The police said in a statement: “We are in the process of responding to a number of queries raised with us by a firm of solicitors acting on behalf of the family of Seeta.”
About 240 inmates involved in a 12-hour riot at one of Britain’s biggest prisons are being moved out of the jail, the Ministry of Justice has said.
The disorder involved as many as 600 of HMP Birmingham’s 1,450 inmates and spread across four of the 11 wings of the G4S-run jail, formerly known as Winson Green, on Friday.
Specially trained prison guards, known as Tornado squads, were backed up by about 25 riot police officers as they moved into the Victorian facility. Order was not restored until late on Friday night.
One prisoner is understood to have sustained a broken jaw during the disturbances but no prison officers were injured.
A Ministry of Justice spokeswoman said the prison remained “calm and ordered” on Saturday and additional staff were on site.
“The Prison Service will continue to work closely with G4S to manage the prison safely over the coming days. A full assessment of the damage is under way. Initial reports indicate that two wings suffered superficial damage, with more serious damage to a further two wings,” she said.
“A limited regime is being offered to those who were not involved in the disturbance and staff continue to work closely with West Midlands police. A thorough investigation into the disturbance is under way.”
The MoJ did not say where the prisoners were being transferred the day after the disturbance, which was the third in a prison in England in less than two months.
Mike Rolfe, the national chairman of the Prison Officers Association, said more than 30 staff had left the jail in recent weeks.
“This prison is a tough place to work, it serves a very big area, it serves a large, dangerous population of prisoners, but it’s not unlike many other prisons up and down the country – ones that have very similar inmates,” he told the BBC.
“We’ve been warning for a long time about the crisis in prisons, and what we are seeing at Birmingham is not unique to Birmingham, but it certainly would seem that this is the most recent worst incident since the 1990 Strangeways riot.”
The head of the National Offender Management Service Agency, Michael Spurr, said gang-related violence and violence fuelled by psychoactive drugs had “really changed the dynamic” in UK prisons.
“Where we are at this moment with our prisons is not where I or anybody, I think, in society would want to be, but I’m confident that we can change that. We now are getting resources for the first time in a number of years that will enable us to do it,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme.
“It will not be done overnight. There are serious problems that will require determined, consistent leadership from governors and staff across the service to put right, but they are incredibly professional, skilled professionals, and with this resource, over the coming months and years, we will turn it around.”
The justice secretary, Liz Truss, said the situation, in which keys giving access to residential prison areas were taken from an officer and inmates occupied some blocks and exercise facilities,would be investigated thoroughly. 
“Violence in our prisons will not be tolerated and those responsible will face the full force of the law,” she said.
Jerry Petherick, a G4S executive, said the prisoners behind the trouble displayed a callous disregard for the safety of other inmates and staff. “This disturbance will rightly be subject to scrutiny and we will work openly and transparently with the Ministry of Justice and other relevant authorities to understand the cause of [Friday’s] disorder.”
The shadow home secretary, Diane Abbott, told Channel 4 News that “private companies should not be involved in taking away people’s liberty. Actually, it’s clear that G4S don’t have the quality of staff to manage a crisis like this.”
Robert Neill, the Conservative chairman of the Commons justice committee, told the programme that the MPs on his committee had warned the government that a “time bomb was ticking” because prisons were in crisis.
Asked if this had been the worst prison riot in years, Neill replied: “This is a problem which has happened both in privately and publicly run systems, so it applies across the piece. I think that does indicate that we have got a situation where, if people are locked down 22, 23 hours a day, as we have discovered, that breeds tension, that breeds violence, and, as you rightly say, we are not actually keeping prisons secure enough to stop contraband getting in.”
HMP Birmingham was the first UK prison to be handed over to the private sector in October 2011. G4S began running the jail with 98 fewer staff than when it was under government control.
Although the 596 former government employees who were transferred to G4S kept the same salaries, new recruits were paid less than the average £28,000 they earned – and on different terms and conditions – the Financial Times reported at the time.
An advertisement on the G4S website states that the company has 25 openings for the full-time role of prison custody officer in Birmingham for which “no specific previous qualifications or experience are required”.
The job pays £20,228.16 a year for 39 hours a week, the equivalent of just under £10 an hour, as well as “company pension, generous holiday entitlement, training and development”.
The chairman of the Prison Officers Association, Mike Rolfe, claims the prison service is in crisis. Speaking on Friday, after a riot broke out in the privately run prison HMP Birmingham, Rolfe also criticised the lack of investment in the prison system
Letters: Muslim wives in particular are usually not aware that their ‘marriage’ has no legal status until the relationship breaks down
The Irish government is failing to protect victims of human trafficking, according to the country’s human rights watchdog.
In a report submitted to the Council of Europe, the Irish Human Rights and Equality Commission (IHREC) said there is a “deficit” in the protection of victims of trafficking and called on the Irish government to act immediately to ensure victims are properly identified and protected.
“Victims of human trafficking in Ireland are not getting the kinds of supports they should be getting,” said Emily Logan, the organisation’s chief commissioner.
Logan met with members of the Council of Europe’s Group of Experts on Action Against Trafficking in Human Beings (Greta), who visited Ireland last week. They are examining how the Irish state deals with human trafficking and how victims are supported and protected. Their second evaluation report is due to be published in 2017, four years after the group’s initial report highlighted numerous gaps in the protections given to victims of trafficking in Ireland.
Colin Smith, a leading Irish human rights barrister who specialises in trafficking law, said IHREC’s report highlights the “unhappy fact” that Ireland lacks a coherent anti-trafficking system capable of effectively prosecuting and punishing traffickers while also protecting their victims.
“It underlines, in particular, the urgent need for a statutory mechanism to identify victims of trafficking,” said Smith. “Every day that passes without substantive reform means that traffickers are going unpunished and victims are going unprotected. We need to move away from thinking of trafficking as an immigration problem and towards a system that is quick and fair, and that treats human trafficking as a serious human rights issue.”
Logan highlighted the case of a 54-year-old Vietnamese woman known as “Ms P”, who was charged with drug offences after being arrested by Irish police during a raid on a cannabis grow house in 2012. Ms P said she was trafficked, but the police did not recognise her as a victim and she was detained for nearly three years. Last year her case against the police was heard in the High Court and the judge ruled that the scheme for identifying and protecting trafficked victims in Ireland was inadequate under EU law.
“The identification process has not improved for victims of trafficking in Ireland,” said Logan.
The report said reform of Ireland’s system for the early identification of trafficking victims was “long overdue”. Logan urged the Irish government to legislate immediately for the identification and protection of victims of trafficking.
“We are saying it should be included as a piece of legislation which obliges the state to comply,” she said. “The likelihood is that the victims will get a better response.”
Sole competence for the identification of potential victims of trafficking is with the Irish police, which the report said “does not represent good practice”. There is concern that, without reform, unidentified victims will experience further human rights violations.
Earlier this year, the US State Department’s annual report (pdf) on Trafficking in Persons (TiP) said victims of forced labour had been identified in the Irish restaurant industry and in car washes. Moreover, for the first time, a non-EU person was identified as a victim of trafficking in the Irish fishing sector.
The IHREC report raised concerns that no prosecutions have taken place in relation to human trafficking for labour exploitation, even though eight potential victims were reported in 2014. The commission said labour inspections must be properly resourced and targeted at high risk sectors such as domestic and restaurant work, the maritime industry, car-washing services and agriculture. The report called on the Irish government to criminalise the use of services that are the object of labour exploitation.
Logan said she had been approached by people in the Irish agri-food sector who have alleged exploitation. Early next year, an IHREC advisory committee involving various trade unions will be set up to focus on labour issues.
Irish human rights groups and NGOs have previously expressed concern about how potential trafficked victims are treated. The Immigrant Council of Ireland’s anti-trafficking manager, Nusha Yonkova, welcomed the report and expressed support for its recommendations.
“Ireland is failing victims of human trafficking,” she said. “The IHREC submission makes it clear that little progress has been made since the first Greta visit in 2012.”
In a statement, Ireland’s Department of Justice said they had not yet had the opportunity to consider the report’s recommendations in full. The department added that they had consulted with IHREC and included their recommendations in the second national plan to prevent human trafficking, which was published in October.
Letters: Muslim wives in particular are usually not aware that their ‘marriage’ has no legal status until the relationship breaks down
The overwhelming majority of people arrested for alleged terrorism offences over the past 15 years have been freed without charge or conviction, official figures show.
Fewer than two in 10 people detained by police since September 2001 were convicted directly of terrorism or a terrorism-related offence.
The figures released by the Home Office showed that 3,349 people in England and Wales were arrested under terrorism laws since the 9/11 attacks on the US.
Of those arrested for terrorism and related offences, 17.8% were convicted in relation to involvement in violent jihad, for instance plotting attacks, funding or facilitating.
Another 10% arrested on suspicion of terrorism were convicted of offences unrelated to the terrorism charges they were originally arrested for, taking the total to 27.6%.
The majority of those arrested were from British Muslim communities.
The figures sparked debate about why most of those arrested on suspicion of involvement in terrorism end up not being charged or convicted of any criminal offence.
Lord Paddick, the Lib Dem spokesman on home affairs in the House of Lords, and a former deputy assistant commissioner at Scotland Yard, said: “The police need to account for these figures. It is extremely worrying that there is such a high attrition rate between those arrested and those convicted of terrorism offences.
“The most important thing with terrorism is community intelligence and building trust and confidence with those communities from where terrorists come. This sort of statistic will tend to undermine that trust and confidence.”
A spokesman for the National Police Chiefs’ Council said: “No one is arrested without sufficient grounds for suspicion but the legal bar for offences is rightly set very high, meaning many will not go on to be charged or convicted.
“These powers are applied appropriately and proportionately to keep the public safe and we do not target a specific community. We take all forms of terrorism and extremism seriously – including from the extreme right wing – and will work hard with all communities to tackle it.”
In Britain’s counter-terrorism system, intelligence is developed by the security service MI5, and then passed to police to take enforcement action and build a case that can convict someone to the criminal standard of beyond a reasonable doubt.
David Videcette, who served as a detective with Scotland Yard’s counter-terrorism command for a decade, said: “A lot of the information comes from the security services. A lot of what they give cannot be used as evidence; it is difficult to convert the intelligence into something that can be used in the criminal justice system.
“No one would thank the police if, because the intelligence cannot be converted, they did nothing.”
The Home Office said decisions to arrest were a matter for the police and decisions to prosecute a matter for the Crown Prosecution Service.
The latest terrorism figures showed arrests were down from their peak a year ago. Counter-terrorism officials say they are working flat out to thwart plots to attack the UK.
In 2001, the biggest threat was from al-Qaida, which was inspired by Osama bin Laden. Since 2014 the Islamic State ideology has been linked to most terror threats on British soil.
The security minister, Ben Wallace, said: “We are determined to detect, disrupt and where possible prosecute all those who pose a threat to the UK. The figures released today once again highlight the hard work carried out by the police, security service and Crown Prosecution Service day in and day out to keep the people of this country safe.”
Chris Grayling is a name that strikes terror into the heart of anyone who cares how well the country is run. Legal aid reform, books to prisoners, and possibly even the catastrophic state of Southern’s industrial relations, which this week left hundreds of thousands of commuters unable to get to work because of a two-day strike – his fingerprints are on them all. Only last week, an email emerged showing Mr Grayling blocking a suggestion from the then mayor of London, Boris Johnson, who wanted to take control of suburban rail services, on the grounds that it would be disastrous if a future Labour mayor had such power. This is a man whose every decision is coloured by ideological advantage, a man in too much of a hurry – as a video that emerged on Thursday showed – even to look behind him for cyclists before opening his car door. This morning, with the publication of the chief inspector of probation’s report on the work of north London’s community rehabilitation company (CRC), another policy executed in politically motivated haste staggered back to roost.
When Mr Grayling became justice secretary in 2012 the probation service was widely considered to be failing. Few questioned the need for reform, although Mr Grayling’s solution of privatising the part of the service that dealt with less serious offenders was not an obvious one. But his department had been heavily cut; he wanted to reform the service without it costing more. He argued that privatisation would release enough new money to extend the support that a good probation service offers to offenders serving short prison terms and community sentences. It was a bold objective – and perhaps the most ambitious privatisation ever attempted – but providing improved rehabilitation and better support in order to reduce reoffending had plenty of advocates. It was the method that alarmed them.
In the words of MPs on the justice committee that examined the proposal, “witnesses … had significant apprehensions about the scale, architecture, detail and consequences of the reforms … and the pace at which the government is seeking to implement them”. They warned that not enough preliminary work had been done and little of it had been tested. They could see a disaster coming down the tracks. Now it is clear that it has arrived.
Dame Glenys Stacey, the chief inspector of probation, found that the services offered in north London by the CRC had failed to reduce the numbers reoffending while losing others altogether. She found caseloads too big to be managed, inexperienced officers – there is no obligation to use professionally qualified staff – “extremely poor” oversight and a lack of senior management focus and control. It was failing, she said, even to do the absolute basics. A week ago, a Guardian community appeal to readers asking for their experience of the privatised service drew 300 responses, many of them describing huge workloads, inexperienced colleagues and the stress of being unable to do the job properly.
Not all of the five inspections of the new CRCs have been critical, but most of them have. There was enough evidence for the current justice secretary, Liz Truss, to announce an internal review last week. She says she is open to radical reform if that is what its report, due in April, recommends. Even that may be complicated by the contracts. They were meant to draw in the scores of local charities that traditionally work with prisoners; instead most of the £3.7bn work went to large foreign-owned companies which now complain that they are unsustainable and the IT system, bequeathed by the Ministry of Justice, inadequate.
The probation service has been seriously damaged. It was an outcome widely predicted – even, as the MPs said, by people who thought it was a good idea. It was the act of a partisan minister who cared more about getting his reforms signed off before the election than he did for the consequences – of which he was warned, again and again.
Sharia courts are a symptom rather than the cause of the problems many Muslim women face (Sharia courts have no place in UK family law, theguardian.com, 14 December). The real problem is that most mosques do not register themselves under the Marriage Act 1949 and imams are willing to perform marriage ceremonies without insisting on the marriage being registered. Muslim wives in particular are usually not aware that their “marriage” has no legal status until the relationship breaks down, and they discover that they are merely cohabitants with few rights and in that circumstance going to a sharia “court” may be the best option they have.
It is a criminal offence to solemnise a marriage that is not registered under the Marriage Act. If the government started enforcing that provision and ensured that all Muslim marriages are properly registered, that would achieve far more for Muslim women than yet another review of sharia courts.
Neil Addison
Barrister, Liverpool
• I never thought I’d agree with Norman Tebbit about anything, but his comments about sharia law – as mocked in (Pass notes, G2, 14 December) – are broadly accurate. As the work of One Law for All, the pressure group campaigning against the spread of sharia law, makes clear, sharia councils and courts act as quasi-judicial authorities, and although they have no status under civil law, many Muslims regard their decisions as binding. These decisions in the field of family law are highly discriminatory against women, and children are also at risk because decisions about residence and contact are made without reference to the Children Act. Crimes under the secular law of the state, such as marital rape, domestic abuse and polygamy, are accepted or even actively promoted. Would that all this were just a “popular myth”.
Lorraine Harding
Retired senior lecturer in social policy, Leeds
• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters
Lawyers must display their prices more prominently so customers know what they will pay, the Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) has recommended in a highly critical report on legal services in the UK. 
Fewer than 17% of solicitors’ firms and other legal providers publish a price list online, the report notes, leaving many clients in the dark about the costs they are likely to incur for even straightforward requests like making wills or dealing with court cases. 
The study concludes: “The legal services sector is not working well for individual consumers and small businesses. [They] generally lack the experience and information needed to find their way around the legal services sector and to engage confidently with providers. 
“Consumers find it hard to make informed choices because there is very little transparency about price, service and quality. This lack of transparency weakens competition between providers and means that some consumers do not obtain legal advice when they would benefit from it. Increasing transparency of price, service and quality is therefore essential for consumers to get a better deal.
“Regulators [should] develop new minimum standards for disclosures of price, service, redress and regulatory status, and require providers to adhere to them.”
Lawyers have traditionally charged by the hour, although such practices are gradually being replaced by fixed pricing deals. “While not all services may be amenable to a fixed price,” the CMA report says, “our analysis indicates that much more could be done to aid comparability.”
The price of a standard simple will ranges from around £110 to £200, the report notes; the price for a complex divorce with a dispute over assets may vary from around £1,260 to £3,000.
The CMA suggests developing comparison websites to allow customers to assess providers. It also recommends that the Ministry of Justice investigate whether to extend protection from existing redress schemes to customers using unauthorised providers.
Coinciding with the report, one price comparison website, the Law Superstore, claimed that British clients may have overpaid lawyers by nearly £500m in the last year, based on the wide price differentials for some basic legal services.
Rachel Merelie, acting executive director for markets and mergers at the CMA, said: “You might not need a lawyer very often but when you do it will often be at a crucial point in your life – whether that’s buying a property, resolving a dispute or getting expert advice on financial and employment matters. So the transparency, affordability and accessibility shortcomings we have identified are a real concern.”
Around £11-12bn a year is spent by consumers on legal services in England and Wales in areas that include commercial law, employment law, family law, conveyancing, wills and probate.
The Law Society, which represents solicitors in England and Wales, said a desire for greater competition and deregulation in the legal services sector should not be allowed to undermine consumer protection.
Its president, Robert Bourns, said: “The CMA’s decision not to conduct a market investigation into the legal sector is welcomed. However, it is astonishing that some of the CMA’s recommendations prioritise deregulation over consumer protection.
“If solicitors were to offer legal services from unregulated companies as suggested by the CMA, then their clients would no longer enjoy a raft of protections – from confidentiality to compensation – offered by every solicitor in a solicitor firm. These deregulatory changes would undermine consumer protections and erode trust in the legal system.”
Paul Philip, chief executive of the Solicitors Regulation Authority, said: “We welcome the final CMA report on its review of the legal market. I am pleased that the CMA has strongly endorsed our reform proposals , which will help to tackle unmet need and support members of the public and small businesses to access legal services.”
More than 20 MPs from seven parties in the UK parliament have urged the British foreign secretary to echo US government calls for the release of the Bahraini human rights activist Nabeel Rajab.
Bahrain’s criminal court on Thursday postponed his trial to 28 December, when he is expected to be sentenced.
Rajab, who faces up to 15 years in jail for comments made on Twitter criticising the war in Yemen, has been held in pre-trial detention since June. He is also accused of “defaming the state” by publishing “false news .. and malicious rumours that undermine the prestige of the kingdom” in an opinion piece in the New York Times.
He was arrested on separate charges of “spreading false information and rumours with the aim of discrediting the state”.
In September, the US State Department spokesman Mark Toner said the government called for the immediate release of Rajab, but the UK has thus far refused to do likewise.
Amnesty International has called the charges a “barefaced assault on freedom of expression”. Human Rights Watch’s executive director, Ken Roth, named Rajab as one of two human rights activists currently imprisoned whom he thought most resembled “the next Nelson Mandela”.
In a letter to Boris Johnson ahead of the trial, which had been due to be held on Thursday, MPs from the Conservatives, Labour, the Scottish National party, the Democratic Unionist party, the Liberal Democrats, the Greens and the SDLP asked the Foreign Office to express its concern.
“We urge you [...] to make it clear to Bahraini officials that the United Kingdom wishes to see his unconditional release from prison, and for the charges brought against him, which are related to his right to freedom of expression and freedom of speech, to be dropped,” it reads.
MPs who have signed the letter include Labour’s Andy Slaughter and Ann Clywd, the Lib Dems’ Tom Brake and Alastair Carmichael, the Greens’ Caroline Lucas and the Conservatives’ Tania Mathias.
During Theresa May’s visit to Bahrain last week, her spokeswoman would not say if any specific cases had been raised in bilaterals, but said the UK did raise human rights cases as part of a wider engagement on Gulf reforms.
Rights campaigners in Bahrain have argued that, although the UK has been engaging closely with Bahraini authorities on judicial and police reform since 2012, its engagement has not prevented crackdowns on journalists and pro-democracy activists in the country.
Since 2011, Rajab has faced multiple prosecutions and prison sentences for his activism. He was banned from travelling in 2014 and has been unable to leave the country. His health is said to have deteriorated since being placed in detention earlier this year.
The SNP’s Margaret Ferrier, the chair of the all-party parliamentary group on democracy and human rights in the Gulf, who coordinated the letter, said: “This is a matter of freedom of speech and expression. Nabeel Rajab is highly regarded as a prominent human rights activist, and these charges are little more than an attempt by Bahraini authorities to silence a dissenting voice.
Sayed Ahmed Alwadaei, the director of advocacy at the Bahrain Institute for Rights and Democracy, said: “We have seen how Theresa May lashed Boris Johnson over his comments on Saudi. Nabeel Rajab criticised Saudi Arabia and Bahrain over their bombardment in Yemen and is facing prison for it.
“If May or her government fail to publicly call for his release, Bahrain will take it as a green light for their repression.”
An inexperienced Sydney journalist and her employer, Yahoo7, face a hefty penalty for publishing a story that resulted in a Melbourne murder jury being discharged.
The Victorian supreme court judge John Dixon last month found reporter Krystal Johnson and Yahoo7 guilty of contempt of court for publishing details about a defendant that could prejudice a jury.
Johnson bypassed subeditors to publish a news story about the trial of Mataio Aleluia on 17 August.
The finding of contempt can be revealed after a guilty verdict was delivered in Aleluia’s retrial on Thursday.
Aleluia was found guilty of murdering mother-of-two Brittany Shanice Harvie, 22, in a violent rage in Clayton South in June 2015 because he thought she had cheated on him.
In delivering his finding in the contempt matter, Dixon said Aleluia was standing trial for the most serious offence known to the law.
“As a matter of fact, the content of the article clearly had a real and definite tendency to prejudice the accused’s trial,” Dixon said.
The Crown prosecutor Kerri Judd QC had described the publication of the article as serious contempt: “What was published was effectively the publication of prior criminal conduct of the same kind alleged in the trial.”
The defence barrister William Houghton QC, in defending the article, had said modern juries should not be equated with “mere peasants”.
He said the trial judge, Justice Lex Lasry, had given a stern and solemn warning to the jury to ignore media coverage.
The contempt trial heard there was a “large spike” in access to the Yahoo7 article the day it was uploaded to the website and it was still receiving hits a day later.
The offending article was accessed about 4,000 times in Victoria, the court heard.
A further hearing in January will consider a penalty and costs for Yahoo7 and Johnson.
The judgment sent a clear message that journalists and publishers need to take special care when publishing material concerning matters that are before a court, the director of public prosecutions, John Champion SC, said in a statement.
The public have been left more at risk by the privatisation of the probation service with some offenders not seen for weeks or months and others lost in the system altogether, according to an official watchdog.
In her most critical report yet, Dame Glenys Stacey, the chief inspector of probation, said that a recent inspection of probation work in the north of London found a simple, unacceptable lack of management attention to whether offenders turned up to appointments and whether their offending behaviour was being challenged.
Her inspection report published on Thursday said probation services in north London have deteriorated since a community rehabilitation company took over the supervision of medium- to low-risk offenders in 2014 and was now poorer than any other area that had been inspected this year.
“A combination of unmanageable caseloads, inexperienced officers, extremely poor oversight and a lack of senior management focus and control meant some offenders were not seen for weeks or months, and some were lost in the system altogether,” concluded the report.
Stacey said: “Delivering probation services in London is never an easy task, but services have deteriorated of late, largely due to the poor performance of the London Community Rehabilitation Company. Services are now well below what people rightly expect, and the city is more at risk as a result.” 
Her highly critical report came after the justice secretary, Elizabeth Truss, acknowledged criticism of the privatised probation companies across England and Wales by demanding the rapid completion of an official review into the performance.
The London CRC, which is owned by MTCnovo, supervises 28,750 offenders, a 12% reduction in the past 12 months. The National Probation Service is responsible for a further 10,071 higher-risk offenders.
But the inspection found that caseloads for individual probation officers ranged from 50 to 100 cases each and some senior probation officers were overseeing more than 900 cases. Despite the 12% fall in the number of offenders it supervised, the London CRC still had a 20% vacancy rate and was heavily reliant on agency staff. Officers were doing little more than “firefighting” rather than prioritising those offenders who posed the most risk of harm to the public.
Many individual probation officers had themselves received no formal supervision for many months and the sickness rate trebled between May and August this year from 23 to 70 off for more than three weeks.
“The lack of a credible system to monitor the cases when responsible officers were off sick had meant that too many service users had not been seen for weeks or months and, in some cases, had been lost in the system entirely,” said the official inspection report.
The watchdog’s report judges the overall effectiveness of the London CRC as “poor” and in particular criticises a lack of awareness of domestic abuse and child safeguarding issues.
Stacey said the publicly-run National Probation Service was delivering services better in London, but with plenty of room for improvement. The quality of work was mixed, but inspectors were pleased to find that, overall, public protection work was satisfactory. The delivery of court services was not entirely without problems.
“We expect the company to make every effort now to deliver the inviolable requirements – the basics of probation – consistently well, and as quickly as possible. We welcome work begun during our inspection to begin to bring about much-needed improvements, and will be back in 2017 to check on progress,” said Stacey.
Justice minister, Sam Gyimah, responded to the inspection findings, saying: “I met senior managers at London CRC and told them this is totally unacceptable. An urgent improvement plan is now in place and I will not hesitate to take more action if necessary. We are also working closely with the mayor’s office for policing and crime.
“We are currently looking at all contracts and are carrying out a comprehensive review of the probation system in England and Wales. This will improve the quality of our probation service, putting the focus on reducing reoffending by getting offenders off drugs and into training or work. Findings from the review will be published in April.”
Napo, the probation union, said the inspectorate had confirmed that privatisation would lead to greater public risk with its most damning report to date.
Ian Lawrence, Napo general secretary, said: “This report is a damning indictment of this government’s reckless social experiment. We urgently need probation services to be reviewed and publicly scrutinised to ensure public safety, quality service delivery and value for money to the taxpayer.”
Helda Swindenbank, London CRC’s director of probation, responded to the report saying: “The number one priority for London CRC is public protection, which is at the core of all that we do. Since the Inspection, we have continued to make significant progress in reducing caseloads managed by our staff, prompt enforcement, and quality of offender supervision.
“This is all informed by the high priority we give to protecting the public. We have already taken steps to ensure that every single case is being actively managed to further protect the public. It’s important to recognise that only 40 cases were inspected, just 0.13%, of London CRC’s caseload.”
Judge rules that woman can move with children aged six and three to US state where Mormon church is based
Poland’s conservative parliament has passed a law restricting public meetings, which that has been slammed by the opposition as anti-democratic.
The legislation, passed late on Tuesday, introduces the concept of “periodic meetings” for rallies organised repeatedly in the same place and on the same date, giving such gatherings priority over other meetings. Under the new law, unrelated meetings must take place at least 100 metres (yards) away from any meeting designated “periodic”.
The ruling rightwing Law and Justice (PiS) party said the law would boost the security of participants at all gatherings by preventing clashes. But opposition lawmakers said the rules prevented “street dialogue” and restricted freedom of speech. They claim the law will allow PiS to organise a monthly meeting, protected from counter-protests, to commemorate the 2010 Smolensk plane crash.
Ninety-six people died including the country’s president, Lech Kaczyński, who was the twin brother of leader of PiS, Jarosław Kaczyński.
Last Saturday, the 80th such ceremony outside the presidential palace in Warsaw was slightly disturbed by an opposition rally.
The bill that was ultimately adopted did however shed provisions that would have given priority to rallies organised by the state and religious organisations.
Opposition politicians and rights activists claimed that the original proposals restricted fundamental rights and freedoms. European lawmakers joined Polish opposition politicians in criticising the law. “Yesterday was a sad day for Poland because now there is a new law governing protests which limits the right of assembly,” said Polish MEP Janusz Lewandowski in Strasbourg.
“Like all other EU citizens, Poles have the right to an independent judiciary ... Polish women have freedom of choice and Poles have the right to freedom of assembly, expression and thought,” said Dutch MEP Sophia in ’t Veld.
Tens of thousands of Poles took to the streets across the country to protest against the PiS government on Tuesday, the 35th anniversary of martial law in communist-ruled Poland.
Uber has launched an appeal against a landmark employment tribunal ruling that its minicab drivers should be classed as workers with access to the minimum wage, sick pay and paid holidays.
The taxi-app company filed papers with the appeal tribunal on Tuesday in an attempt to overturn the October judgment that, if it stands, could affect tens of thousands of workers in the gig economy.
The move came as several dozen Uber drivers picketed City Hall on Wednesday holding placards demanding Transport for London, which licences Uber as a private hire operator in the capital, “end sweated labour now”. It also mounted a protest at the City of London offices of Salesforce, a US computing company that is a major Uber client.
Two Uber drivers, James Farrar and Yaseen Aslam, took Uber to court on behalf of a group 19 others who argued that they were employed by the San Francisco-based company, rather than working for themselves. Uber’s business model has been based on treating drivers who log on to its app as self-employed contractors and taking a cut of their fares, which Uber dictates.
The employment tribunal judges were scathing about Uber’s case that drivers who use its phone app to pick up fares were self-employed.
“The notion that Uber in London is a mosaic of 30,000 small businesses linked by a common ‘platform’ is to our minds faintly ridiculous,” they said. “Drivers do not and cannot negotiate with passengers … They are offered and accept trips strictly on Uber’s terms.”
Farrar said Uber’s appeal was expected but was “really disappointing”. “It means we have to fight again, but why?” he said. “It is just because they don’t want to pay the minimum wage. We are confident. Our case is rock solid and the original judgment was emphatic.”
Jo Bertram, Uber’s UK general manager, said: “Tens of thousands of people in London drive with Uber precisely because they want to be self-employed and their own boss. The overwhelming majority of drivers who use the Uber app want to keep the freedom and flexibility of being able to drive when and where they want.”
Meanwhile, 25 more Uber drivers are planning to claim workers’ rights from Uber and have joined the legal action the law firm Leigh Day is bringing with the GMB union.
“Since the judgment was issued, we and GMB have spoken to hundreds of Uber drivers who wish to claim compensation for Uber’s failure to provide these entitlements in the past, as well as to ensure that they are paid at least the national minimum wage and holiday pay in future,” said Nigel MacKay, the lawyer representing the claimants.
“We are issuing claims on behalf of those drivers and the latest 25 claimants who have joined the legal action will be included in claims for compensation. We anticipate issuing further claims on behalf of drivers in the coming weeks.”
Leigh Day believes there may be thousands of drivers who can claim for the money and benefits they have not received as drivers for Uber.
Uber’s appeal comes amid mounting concern within the government about the growing trend towards self-employed workforces. The government has recently announced a six-month review of modern working practices and HMRC is setting up a new unit, the employment status and intermediaries team, to investigate companies.
Last week Frank Field, the chairman of the House of Commons work and pensions select committee, published a report including the testimonies of 83 Uber drivers, which claimed that they had almost no independence.
Field’s report, contested by Uber, said the company dictates drivers’ working patterns once they have logged on, imposes lockouts from its system if drivers turn down too many jobs, and has raised its commission while cutting the rates drivers can charge. This, combined with the cost of the vehicles needed to meet Uber’s requirements, is creating “chronically low pay” and insecurity, the report said.
The British government and parliament have failed the people of Syria, yet again. Like rabbits caught in headlights they have no plan of practical action to save civilian lives.
Yesterday’s debate in the House of Commons was all tears and talk. There was no vote to do anything. Theresa May’s absence and the lack of a government action plan signalled that Downing Street is not taking the plight of civilians seriously.
Boris Johnson’s futile rant against Bashar al-Assad and Putin looked like bluster to cover up his own lack of proposals. Yet again he offered more excuses; mistakenly claiming that aid drops are impossible because they’d put RAF planes and aircrew at risk of being shot down. In fact, aid could be delivered by pilotless drones and GPS-guided parachutes.
While all the focus is now on Aleppo, we need to remember that nearly five million Syrians are living in other besieged and hard-to-access cities, towns and villages. Aid drops are urgently needed. Britain and other states with the capacity must act now.
Last Friday, by 122 votes to 13, the UN general assembly demanded a ceasefire in Syria; an end to all sieges and the delivery of humanitarian aid to the suffering populations. This gives the UK and other countries a UN mandate to carry out air drops of food, medicine, blankets and fuel. These are desperately needed by starving, freezing and wounded civilians.
The other urgent priority right now is to protect Syrians from massacre in territory seized by Assad. We remember the killings after Yarmouk, Darayya and Homs were captured by his soldiers. This must not be allowed to happen again, as regime troops take over the rest of Aleppo.
To prevent or minimise the possibility of a slaughter ensuing, the UK should be pressing the UN to send in observers to monitor civilians, backed up by peacekeepers, as soon as possible. Their presence would deter disappearances, torture and extrajudicial murders – and these must be documented if, heaven forbid, they happen.
Our government and others should issue warrants for the arrest of parties to the conflict – primarily the Syrian government and military – who have been responsible for mass torture. We have the legal authority to do this under the UN Convention Against Torture 1984 and section 134 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988. Although getting them to trial might be difficult – at least in the short term – this would be a powerful, symbolic gesture and would send a deterrent signal to would-be torturers.
Finally, the UK government ought to take the lead in securing a UN agreement to set up a Syria war crimes tribunal, similar to those established in the wake of the Yugoslav and Rwandan conflicts. Its remit should be to prosecute all war criminals on all sides, including war crimes by the Assad and Putin regimes, Isis and other Islamist groups, the Free Syrian Army and even possible criminal acts by US-led coalition forces.
Britain should aim to bring on board other countries to back and implement these initiatives, creating an international drive for serious, concrete action to save civilian lives – and to bring to justice war criminals and perpetrators of crimes against humanity. The time for talk and hand-wringing is over. Syrians need action now.
The former senior counsel on the national child abuse inquiry has been cleared of any wrongdoing in an independent investigation by his chambers. Ben Emmerson QC, who quit the independent inquiry into child sexual abuse (IICSA) in September, was named in a BBC Newsnight programme after an inquiry worker revealed details of an alleged sexual assault in a lift.
The abuse inquiry, under the chairmanship of Prof Alexis Jay, has repeatedly refused to release any further information about Emmerson’s departure. His law chambers, Matrix, set up an independent inquiry into the allegations of sexual assault and sexual harassment. It was led by the former director of public prosecutions, Sir David Calvert-Smith.
Matrix said on Wednesday: “After examining the evidence, Sir David submitted his final report to the management committee earlier this week. In his report, Sir David concluded ‘without hesitation’ that Mr Emmerson had not committed any act of sexual assault or sexual harassment.”
Welcoming the inquiry’s findings, Emmerson said: “This has been a difficult period and I am naturally very pleased that an independent senior judge has now confirmed that the allegations against me were always unfounded. I hope that the inquiry can now be left to get on with its important work, free from unnecessary distractions.”
Emmerson resigned after being suspended by the inquiry over concerns, it said, “about aspects of Mr Emmerson’s leadership of the counsel team”. The prime minister, Theresa May, was forced to step in to express her confidence in the inquiry, which is costing £100m over five years.
A review of the inquiry’s work, which has been carried out by Jay, is due to be published in the near future.
The allegation of sexual harassment was not put to Emmerson before he resigned from the inquiry. Panel members on the inquiry were made aware of the allegations. The highly experienced QC had already made his decision to leave the child abuse inquiry before he was told about the allegation.
In the meantime, IICSA has formally launched a separate, independent examination of the way Emmerson’s resignation was handled. It may now ask why Emmerson was not asked about the now discredited allegation at the time so that he could respond.
Emmerson is now back working on international cases, his previous area of legal specialisation. 
The human rights campaigner Helena Kennedy, who has worked with Emmerson, welcomed the independent inquiry’s finding that dismissed the allegations of sexual misconduct. 
“I have known Ben for many, many years,” Lady Kennedy said. “He’s a feminist. He lives as he speaks. He had discussed this matter with me. He’s not someone who takes liberties with people. I shared his shock when a public allegation was made. I’m satisfied that it was ill-founded.”
“We oppose any religious body – whether presided over by men or women – that seeks to rule over us.” So say more than 300 mostly Muslim women, but also others from different faiths who have been abused in their personal lives. These women are voicing their alarm, through a powerful statement published by Open Democracy, about the growing power of religious bodies such as sharia councils, and demand that their voices also be heard in the current debate.
From their own lived experiences, they warn against any attempt to normalise profoundly regressive religious codes of conduct as the basis of social interaction with, and policy development aimed at, minority women. They do so against the backdrop of Louise Casey’s report that warns of minority women who are trapped in abuse and isolation, and two ongoing inquiries into sharia councils: one initiated by the government and the other by the home affairs select committee.
The signatories to the statement have witnessed, experienced or fled from the horrors and degradations of “honour” killings, domestic violence, child and ritual abuse, forced marriage, polygamy, rape and sexual assaults. They speak out against religious impositions that exacerbate their daily struggles to live their lives as they choose. They reject the forces of fundamentalism and patriarchy that seek to divide and govern through surveillance and control of female sexuality.
These women remind us of the inherent dangers faced by all vulnerable minority women when religious fundamentalists masquerade as “guardians of faith” in order to take control of personal and family relationships. They speak out against the forces that would squeeze out the richness of cultural diversity and the life-affirming values of tolerance, humanity and compassion. As they put it, their ability to freely share and partake in diverse religious and secular traditions, creates “small pieces of happiness” in otherwise relentlessly difficult circumstances.
In our day-to-day work at Southall Black Sisters, we find little evidence to suggest that marginalised women within minority communities want engagement with the “marketplace” of Islamic or other religious ideals in family matters. The women we work with readily recognise that religion is itself implicated in the violence they experience, and in the community and state structures of power that militate against their rights. This insight is, of course, behind many struggles for equality and accountability that women have waged within and outside of the formal legal system.
The experiences of these women tell us that the entrenchment of sharia councils and parallel legal systems within minority communities creates a space for the perpetuation of patriarchal control and harm to women, children and others perceived to be apostates, atheists and nonconformists. Secular feminist spaces – the long fought for and now beleaguered refuges and advocacy centres – are their best hope of accessing justice. Secular – not religious – spaces provide vulnerable minority women with alternatives to violence, isolation and fear, creating opportunities to build solidarity based on need and not religious or communal identity. The evidence and testimonies gathered from such women have been submitted to the home affairs select committee by Southall Black Sisters and our coalition partners as part of the One Law for All campaign.
Sadly, these warnings are necessary because fundamentalist demands are embraced by some in feminist circles who claim to speak from positions of faith while failing to recognise the political dimensions of resurgent religious fundamentalist movements in the UK. Disconcertingly, this form of faith-based feminism is also co-opted by religious fundamentalists. By using the language of female “agency” and “choice”, they strengthen patriarchal structures of power and subvert the emancipatory goals of feminism and human rights. Feminism in minority communities has reached a critical juncture, caught in the eye of powerful reactionary forces of religion and racism.
Rather than oppose both in equal measure, the imperatives of religious identity politics appear to lead some faith-based feminists to align themselves with the religious right and thereby strip their politics of its progressive and ethical content. Such a stance is not any the less regressive simply because some Muslim women may refer themselves – or be referred by others acting on their behalf – to sharia councils.
Those of us who try to challenge religious laws – on the basis of long-established secular feminist principles, international human rights and gender equality laws – are increasingly labelled “anti-faith”, “unrepresentative” or “Islamophobic”. But we work to help the most marginalised women – like those who signed today’s statement – to build feminist cultures based on common and universal values of human rights, citizenship and the rule of law. We work to prevent the entrenchment of deeply misogynist and highly unaccountable religious power; a power that, once established, will not be easily relinquished in the current climate of social and economic instability.
For the record, Southall Black Sisters has never claimed, and will never claim, to represent or speak on behalf of Muslim women or anyone else. We have spent our political lives opposing self-appointed religious and community leaders who allocate to themselves the power to speak on behalf of entire communities. Some claim their views to be representative of the voice of “Muslim women”. We choose not to assume such a mantle for any group of women. Our only endeavour is to advocate for the rights of all black and minority women – those of all religious backgrounds and none – in the face of racism, discrimination, violence and inhuman and degrading treatment by their families, communities and the state. We will not forsake the experiences of our Muslim sisters who, like other women, arrive at our doors desperately seeking access to justice.
Our demand is simple: no religious arbitration of any kind in family matters. We want a secular law underpinned by human rights values to be applicable to all, without exception. As the One Law for All campaign has continued to assert, this is the only way to guarantee freedom of religion as well as freedom from religion. The challenges we face are too important to be reduced to a crude and regressive politics of representation.
A Briton who wanted to stop his former partner taking their children to live in an American state where the Mormon church is based has lost a family court fight.
The Mormon woman asked a judge to allow her to move their six-year-old son and three-year-old daughter to Utah.
She told Mr Justice Bodey that she had married an American Mormon construction worker and wanted to join him in the US. Her former partner objected and said their daughter might be “treated in an inferior way” in Utah.
But Bodey approved the woman’s relocation application. Details of the case have emerged in a ruling by the judge following a private family court hearing in Middlesbrough.
The children had lived with their mother after she and their father separated, the judge heard. She said her ex-partner had “lost interest” in seeing the children.
Bodey, who is based in the family division of the high court in London, concluded that a move to Utah would be in the children’s best interests and said the pros outweighed the cons.
The judge said there was no evidence that the little girl would suffer inferior treatment and the mother’s plans were realistic and thought through. Evidence suggested that she would be better off financially and the judge said she would be living with her husband in a place where she wanted to “make her life”.
She had said she wanted the children to grow up knowing their father and his family.
Jason knew he wouldn’t and shouldn’t get the job. Yet his jobcentre adviser told him to apply to the pharmaceutical warehouse anyway. The problem? “I’m a convicted drug dealer. They won’t even let me set foot in the place.”
Like many of the former prisoners I’ve met recently through my research for the Centre for Justice Innovation, Jason knows only too well the stigma of having done time. He’s also become aware of the limited advice out there for ex-prisoners wanting to make a fresh start.
Ex-prisoners we spoke to held out little hope of receiving help from places like Jobcentre Plus and local authority housing teams. In fact, we heard stories of subtle discrimination from the very public sector bodies which they rely on. As one person told us: “They don’t have a clue … The moment you come through the door they’ve got a judgment on you.” Former offenders are being neglected by services that don’t understand their needs and are often labelled as problematic or aggressive.
This matters. People coming out of prison need all the help they can get. Ministry of Justice research (pdf) has shown that former prisoners who have a stable home on release are 15% less likely to reoffend. Those with a job are 20% less likely to commit another crime. In a climate where homes and jobs are scarce offenders need all the help they can get. Nearly two in five prisoners (37%) say that they will need help finding a place to live when they are released (pdf). Three out of four don’t have a job lined up on release (pdf).
The difficulties that former prisoners face are compounded by the shadow of their criminal past. Our research has uncovered many stories of prisoners facing discrimination and prejudice. Margaret, an articulate woman in her forties, was fired after several years working in a job, accused of lying about her criminal record on her original application form. In reality, no one had thought to ask. Then there’s Ahmed, whose health was suffering as a result of damp in his rented flat. When he asked the landlord to fix it he was forced to leave, on the spurious pretext that he was intimidating his neighbours.
If we are to reduce the £15bn annual cost of reoffending we have to tackle this uncomfortable truth. Clearly, part of the solution is for welfare agencies to get better at working with people who’ve been to prison. In practice, the best way to tackle prejudice is to equip and expect prisoners to stand up for themselves. 
In theory, the hundreds of voluntary advice centres around the country should offer a solution. Citizens advice bureaus (CABs), law centres and independent advice providers specialise in helping people to understand and challenge poor treatment. However, they have been hit by a perfect storm of funding cuts and rising demand. Even the most determined now find it hard to access these services. For former prisoners conditioned to expect disappointment, ploughing through the system often feels a waste of time.
We did find a few stand out, advice projects which work alongside probation and prisons. Ipswich Housing Action Group, for example, has been running debt clinics in prisons for 10 years. They help prisoners to clear debts and rent arrears so they can find a place to live on release. Coventry CAB developed a dedicated advice clinic for people on probation, housing, debt, benefits and employment issues. However, resources for these services are scarce. Coventry’s dedicated clinic, like many others, closed with the restructuring of probation in 2015. Likewise, the Ipswich service has reduced its scope.
We would like to see probation and prisons, especially the newly autonomous prisons that are meant to be standard bearers for rehabilitation, to invest in advice for prisoners, both inside and on release. However, we recognise that the justice system is itself struggling with budget cuts.
There’s no quick fix. Perhaps we can learn from advice givers who are taking on the challenges of austerity. Hackney law centre in London has trained up local clergy to provide a kind of advice first aid. With their links to people in the community the clergy are well-placed to diagnose and respond to the straightforward issues. People with more complex problems are pointed towards the right source of help. This has proved so effective, that plans are now afoot to turn the training programme into a smartphone app. Perhaps there’s something in this approach that probation could borrow in their work with offenders.
Our public services are looking at a future of being called on to do more for less. Apps and volunteers are by no means a silver bullet. But with imaginative training, simple technology and strategic investment, we can help former prisoners challenge prejudice and lay the foundations of a new life. Ultimately, that’s not just good for Jason, Margaret and Ahmed, it’s good for all of us.
Stephen Whitehead is programme manager for the Centre for Justice Innovation and author of the report Point me in the right direction: making advice work for former prisoners.
Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic and sign up for your free weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to you every Thursday.
EU nationals living in Britain should make a file of documents that prove they have lived in the country since before the June referendum, according to the chair of a House of Lords committee.
Helena Kennedy QC suggested collecting together bills, rental or home ownership documents, employment paperwork, or evidence of appointments for those who do not have jobs.
“Make a file now with proof of your presence [and] supporting letters from people who’ve known you, you have taught you or who you have had business dealings with,” said Lady Kennedy in an interview with the Guardian.
The peer chairs a Lords EU subcommittee that has just completed an investigation into the “acquired rights” of Europeans in the UK and Britons living in continental Europe. She warned of deep anxiety among EU citizens in the UK but also British nationals living on the continent.
After hearing from a series of experts, ambassadors from across Europe and Britons living overseas, the group will on Wednesday call for a unilateral undertaking to immediately guarantee to safeguard the rights of all EU nationals in the UK.
Saying that Theresa May has a “heavy moral obligation” to make the first move, it also warns:
Its report also concludes that international law may not provide much reassurance for EU citizens. “The evidence we received makes very clear that the doctrine of acquired rights under public international law will provide little, if any, effective protection for former EU rights once the UK withdraws from the EU,” it says.
Evidence heard by the peers on the EU justice subcommittee suggested that asking those who qualified to remainin Britain to apply for permanent residence would result in a “vast” administrative burden on government.
Instead the committee urged the government to consider a simple “new status” for all Europeans in Britain before a set date.
Although its report does not suggest EU citizens collect their documents together, Kennedy told the Guardian it would be sensible to argue that people should make arrangements, especially if they did not have a paper trail through employment.
She said the rights that experts had warned the committee about included being able to travel, set up businesses, be in employment, qualify for benefits, access education and healthcare, and retain a pension.
“Pensions are one of the great sources of anxiety because will you be able to transport it? There is a lot of talk about ‘passporting’ of the financial services at a grand level, but what about the passporting of people’s ordinary rights?” she said.
The prime minister has expressed a desire to protect the rights of EU citizens living in Britain, but has said that it must be part of reciprocal deal in which Britons on the continent were offered the same protections.
Kennedy, a leading human rights lawyer, said May had a political desire to take action. The peer added that she believed the government wanted to secure a deal but that the best action would be to take the first step.
“It should be done unilaterally. They should say, ‘We will protect everyone at this moment of time,’” Kennedy said, arguing that would earn goodwill.
She said that to avoid an influx of people moving to Britain , the cut off deadline should either be the June referendum, or the moment at which May makes a declaration.
Kennedy spoke about representations to her committee: including employers in the care industry who asked whether they ought to be advising EU workers to return home; European citizens who were asking about their children entering secondary school; and others who had entered British saving schemes. 
She also talked of a Briton with a Polish wife, whose widowed mother was nervous about a move to the UK because she feared losing access to healthcare.
Kennedy also pointed to fears listed in the report submitted by Britons living in continental Europe. They include the state pension concerns of a 55-year old woman with disabilities in Frankfurt, concerns about a marital break up in France and the right to continue working as a doctor, and worries about access to healthcare in Greece.
Her committee’s next job is to look at the impact of Brexit on other issues including the family courts, and how divorce proceedings and custody arrangements might be affected.
Sarah Ludford, who sits on the committee and is the Liberal Democrats’ Brexit spokeswoman in the Lords, added: “The government has a clear moral as well as economic responsibility to commit now to guaranteeing the rights of all EU nationals living in the UK.
“These people have built their lives in Britain and are our neighbours, colleagues and friends, they must not be reduced to pawns in the government’s Brexit negotiations.”
Lady Ludford said a unilateral move would foster reciprocity towards UK citizens and would lift a “cloud of uncertainty over some 5 million people”.
Letters: After more than 300 years of asserting parliamentary supremacy, the ghost of royal tyranny returns to haunt us
My sister, Charlotte Bayntun-Coward, who has died aged 77, was a remarkable person. On one level she was an elegant woman who lived in a beautiful house outside Bath, adored her family and gave wonderful parties. But she was also a passionate advocate for the vulnerable in and around Bath.
Charlotte was born in Chesham Bois, Buckinghamshire, daughter of John Gibbons, who worked for the Arts Council when he returned from a PoW camp in Germany after the second world war, and his wife, Mersa (nee Foster), a teacher and artist. Charlotte did not take full advantage of her education, leaving school with virtually no qualifications. She worked as a dental nurse, as an assistant to the actor Donald Wolfit, and for the BBC in Bristol before her marriage in 1963 to the antiquarian bookseller Hylton Bayntun-Coward.
But once her children were born, Charlotte went to Bath Technical college (now Bath College) to study for her A-levels and duly went on to train as a social worker. She became a magistrate, fostered newborn babies awaiting adoption and got a job as a social worker at her local GP practice.
When she was 50 she became the almoner of St John’s hospital, Bath, which provides almshouse accommodation and grants, a role that allowed her to support vulnerable people in practical ways. She stayed at St John’s for 25 years, finally retiring at the age of 75.
She also worked for a whole range of other organisations, including those concerned with mental health (our father suffered from schizophrenia so she always felt affinity with people with mental health issues) and homelessness. She worked phenomenally hard, but she also knew how to have fun and loved travelling – to east Africa, Russia, the US, Norway, Mozambique, Turkey and India.
Hylton died in 2000. Charlotte is survived by her children, Emma, Edward, Polly and Jo, 12 grandchildren, her companion, Tony, her brother, William, and me.
He was one of Margaret Thatcher’s favourite ministers, wasn’t he? That’s right. A tough and traditional rightwing Eurosceptic Tory.
They’re becoming fashionable again. So I hear. But Tebbit’s worried.
How so? We’re leaving the EU, and the Tories are a million points ahead in the polls. Yes but he has written in the Telegraph that he is worried about “the increasing proportion of our population who simply do not accept many basic assumptions about how [our] society should be organised”.
I agree. Recent attacks on the judges who ruled against the government on Brexit show a contempt for the rule of law which is the basis of British freedom. Ah, no. Those aren’t the people he was worried about.
Who then? It’s the Muslims.
Ah yes. “Until very recently in our society,” he says, “child marriage, bigamy, divorce at the will of the male partner, the imprisonment of wives at the will of their husband, female genital mutilation and abortion on the grounds of the sex of the unborn child were unacceptable and indeed criminal offences.”
Those things are all still unacceptable and are all still criminal offences. Perhaps Tebbit has got Britain confused with, ooh I don’t know, Sudan. I don’t think so. He says that British law is being challenged by “a rival legal system with its own courts such as that now represented by the network of sharia law”, and as a result “Islam challenges our way of life in our own country”. He also says political correctness stops “the establishment” from talking about it.
Is any of this true? Nope. There are some unofficial sharia “councils” around the UK, but they have no legal force. Some Muslims might decide to follow their rulings, just like a Christian couple might ask their priest what to do, or anyone might toss a coin. None of it is binding unless you also sign a contract to bind yourself under British law.
So the establishment isn’t talking about it, because it isn’t happening? Oh, the establishment is talking about it all right, because it’s such a popular myth. Theresa May launched a review into sharia law earlier this year.
Perhaps Lord Tebbit missed that? No doubt he did.
Do say: “That Judge Rinder, he’s a challenge to the supremacy of statute.”
Don’t say: “That Enoch Powell, he had the right idea.”
The women were mothers and teenagers, waitresses and aspiring actresses. They had chance encounters with Bill Cosby and long-term friendships. But they all tell a similar story: of how Cosby, at the height of his fame, incapacitated them with laced drinks or mystery pills and then sexually assaulted them.
Now, the battle begins over whether they can tell those stories in court.
Prosecutors in Montgomery County, where the legendary entertainer is on trial for three felony counts of aggravated indecent assault, will argue on Tuesday for a judge to allow 13 of Cosby’s accusers to testify. The 13 women, none of whose accusations have resulted in criminal charges, accuse Cosby of crimes ranging from inappropriate touching to rape, in incidents dating all the way back to the 1960s.
Judge Steven O’Neill’s decision, which will follow two days of legal argument, could wind up being one of the most influential in the entire case. Without forensic evidence, witnesses, or a timely police report to present, prosecutors may struggle to convict Cosby. The current prosecutor’s predecessor, Bruce Castor, has expressed skepticism that a jury would find Cosby guilty unless other several other accusers testified to a pattern of behavior.
The criminal case unfolding in Norristown, Pennsylvania, arises from accusations made by Andrea Constand, a former Temple University employee and a onetime mentee of Cosby’s, that he drugged and digitally penetrated her at his home in 2004.
Constand’s accusations are bolstered by damaging remarks that Cosby himself made during civil litigation. But prosecutors are eager to summon the power of the accusations against Cosby made in the media to the courtroom. 
Although more than 50 women have accused Cosby of crimes ranging from inappropriate touching to rape, the statute of limitations for most of those allegations has expired. The case in Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, therefore, is likely to be the only instance of criminal prosecution – and the only opportunity many of Cosby’s accusers have to confront him in court. 
Normally, prosecutors are barred from presenting testimony about prior bad acts committed by a criminal defendant, on the basis that such evidence can prejudice the jury. But Pennsylvania is one of several states that permits such testimony if it speaks to a criminal pattern. 
Several patterns emerge when reading the accounts of the 13 women willing to testify that Cosby violated them sexually. The women are mostly young and all of them claim that Cosby incapacitated them with spiked drinks, unidentified pills or pills he presented as “headache cures”.
Some of the women had fleeting encounters with Cosby – as cocktail waitresses or flight attendants. But several said they considered Cosby a friend or mentor. A masseuse who claims Cosby drugged and raped her said he first made an effort to “ingratiate himself with her family”. A waitress who accuses Cosby of drugging a glass of wine he gave her said Cosby doted on and mentored her young son. She claims Cosby invited her to attend one of his performances and used the limousine ride to the theater to drug and assault her.
In earlier hearings and court filings, attorneys for Cosby hinted that they would put up a bruising fight. One document revealed that Cosby’s defense team had already begun to look for unflattering details about his accusers – such as one woman’s connection to drug smugglers. Cosby’s attorneys have also argued that the age of some of the allegations make them impossible to disprove, because Cosby would be hard-pressed to recall details and several of the accusers could not name a date, time or place where the assault allegedly occurred.
“We are left with reports that were prepared by their detectives just recently,” said Brian McMonagle, one of Cosby’s attorneys, at a recent hearing. Their accusations, he said, amount to “sometime, somewhere, someplace Bill Cosby did something to me”.
The women are anonymous in the court filings, but 10 of them have told their stories in detail under their full names in the media.
Prosecutors interviewed dozens of accusers who do not appear on their list of 13 potential witnesses, other Cosby accusers told the Philadelphia Inquirer. They seemed to rule out women whose stories were not highly similar to Constand’s.
Constand is a former employee of Temple University, where Cosby studied for several years in his youth and still holds an honorary bachelor’s degree. In January 2005, she reported to police that Cosby, whom she considered a mentor, gave her drugs at his Pennsylvania home and fondled her while she drifted in and out of consciousness. The incident took place in 2004, she claims.
Castor, who was Montgomery County’s top prosecutor at the time, declined to bring charges, and Cosby quietly settled Constand’s claims in civil court in 2006.
Then, in 2015, the Associated Press published excerpts of Cosby’s deposition in that civil case. In the deposition, he admitted to obtaining quaaludes to give to women for the purpose of obtaining sex. He also acknowledged giving Constand three unspecified pills before their sexual encounter. The new top prosecutor, Kevin Steele, the district attorney, announced charges just before the statute of limitations expired.
The deposition could be a key piece of evidence against Cosby when the case goes to trial.
Also potentially damaging is a recording of a decade-old phone call between Cosby and Constand’s mother, Gianna. In a previous hearing, Cosby’s defense and the prosecutors sparred over whether Cosby knew the call was recorded, or was misled.
In his 2005 deposition, Cosby said he apologized to Gianna during that phone call for having sexual contact with her daughter. “I’m apologizing because I’m thinking this is a dirty old man with a young girl,” Cosby said in the deposition. Cosby maintains that his sexual encounter with Constand was consensual.
Cosby’s trial is scheduled to begin on 5 June 2017.
A single attorney has had more clients sentenced to death in federal court than any other defence lawyer in America. He’s part of a deeply flawed system that is about to get worse
A strike by train drivers has brought Southern services to a halt after the court of appeal rejected a second attempt by the rail company to block the action.
Judges upheld last week’s ruling by the high court to dismiss claims by Southern’s owner, Govia Thameslink Railway (GTR), that industrial action called by the train drivers’ union, Aslef, infringed rights under European law.
GTR had already urged passengers not to travel on Tuesday, irrespective of the court’s decision, warning that it would not be able to run a service.
Drivers will also strike on Wednesday and Friday this week, and plan six consecutive days of strikes in January. An ongoing overtime ban on the short-staffed train service is further affecting services, even on non-strike days.
Charles Horton, GTR’s chief executive, said the company was disappointed by the court of appeal’s ruling: “Regrettably, there will be no train services for passengers tomorrow, Wednesday and Friday. We strongly advise people not to travel.
“We will now be asking Acas to convene urgent and immediate talks between GTR and Aslef; talks that we hoped to get moving over the weekend, but Aslef would not agree. Our aim is to find a resolution to their dispute so we can bring an end to the misery being suffered by the travelling public.”
But Mick Whelan, general secretary of Aslef, said the strike had been forced by an intransigent management. “Industrial action is always the last resort. Even now, all we want is for the company to sit down with us and negotiate – properly, sensibly and in good faith, not to simply restate their old entrenched position – and do a deal for the benefit of passengers, staff and, of course, the company.”
The court ruling came as Chris Grayling, the transport secretary, stepped up his attack on the rail unions, claiming that they were demanding “not just to stop the current modernisation process, but to start reversing 30 years of working practice changes right across the country”.
Grayling wrote to MPs on Monday to reiterate his belief that the strikes were politically motivated, saying he did not want to further politicise the dispute by taking part in negotiations.
He wrote: “When I met the general secretary of Aslef soon after my appointment, with virtually his first breath he promised me ‘10 years of industrial action’. I have therefore believed it better to avoid direct ministerial involvement in negotiations during the autumn, as my involvement would make the issue even more political than it is.”
Whelan, however, said that Grayling was “being less than honest on all counts” and accused him of selectively quoting “a private meeting I had with him held, in good faith, under Chatham House rules”.
Grayling’s letter also claimed that “Aslef didn’t turn up” to talks with Southern and had refused a further offer of talks without preconditions on Monday, adding that these were “not the actions of a union that wants to act to get services back to normal”.
An Aslef spokesman said: “The secretary of state is being incredibly disingenuous, as nothing had been arranged, so there was nothing to which we could turn up.”
The home secretary, Amber Rudd, added to criticism of unions, branding the action “totally unacceptable”.
Andy McDonald, the shadow transport secretary, said it was an insult to passengers to blame Southern’s failures on trade unions rather than the incompetence of management and government ministers. He said: “As commuters are well aware, Southern’s sub-standard service predates any industrial action and trains are cancelled, late and dangerously overcrowded every day regardless of strike action.
“The truth is that ministers are defending this failed franchise as a point of political pride when they should be sticking up for taxpayers and commuters.”
Commuters are planning a protest march on Thursday from Southern’s main London hub, Victoria station, to the Department of Transport.
The Association of British Commuters is demanding an immediate government intervention in the dispute and a public inquiry into the collapse of Southern rail services. It also called on Grayling to act or resign.
Welcome to the Guardian’s weekly Brexit briefing, a summary of developments as Britain moves towards the EU exit. If you’d like to receive it as a weekly email, please sign up here (and check your spam folder if you don’t see it in your inbox).
A heads-up, also, that the Guardian has launched a Brexit podcast: Brexit Means… The first episode offers a brief history of Brexit and you can listen to it here. Episode two looks at article 50 and the various legal challenges to it. It will be out next week.
Producing the Guardian’s independent, in-depth journalism takes a lot of time and money. But we do it because we believe our perspective matters – and it might well be your perspective too. If you value our Brexit coverage, become a Guardian Supporter and help make our future more secure. Thank you.
Win, loss or score draw? The jury is still out on whether Theresa May suffered a grievous defeat at the hands of parliament last week or pulled off a resounding victory. Or whether it was perhaps a bit of both.
What happened, first, was that Labour joined forces with a bunch of Conservative rebels to demand that the prime minister publish the government’s plan for Brexit before article 50 is triggered and the UK starts the two-year divorce process.
This she promised to do – whereupon MPs led by the astute shadow Brexit secretary, Keir Starmer, insisted the plan must actually be a plan, as opposed to some vague hope (as in the now-familiar “get the best possible deal for Britain”).
Starmer insisted that to qualify as a plan, it must answer key questions. such as would the UK seek to stay in the customs union and the single market, but also provide enough detail for MPs to scrutinise it and economists to assess its impact.
Remainers saw it as a big win in the battle for more clarity on the government’s somewhat opaque Brexit strategy.
Leavers, however, insisted ministers had won, because it was never said how much detail the “plan” would actually contain – and because in the same non-binding vote, MPs also promised to let the government trigger Brexit by the end of March.
By approving Labour’s motion – demanding a Brexit plan – and the government amendment – setting an article 50 deadline – parliament had in effect given the government “a blank Brexit cheque”, leavers argued.
Remainers, of course, denied this, mainly because the supreme court – which spent four enthralling days hearing submissions on the question – may decide ministers cannot trigger article 50 without passing a whole new bill anyway.
That, obviously, would demand another parliamentary vote. As they showed last week, MPs are highly unlikely to vote against any proposed article 50 legislation (that would be “defying the will of the people”).
But they could significantly amend it, forcing May, for example, to put a lot more meat on the bones of the government’s plan than she would like to. The 11 judges announce their decision in January; it will be a big moment.
On Monday, the chancellor, Philip Hammond, told MPs – in slightly convoluted fashion – that the government would be likely to seek a transitional deal to help smooth the Brexit process, confirming that in his view it may well take longer than two years to complete negotiations:
Whether the UK will be offered such a deal is not clear; EU officials have not shown themselves particularly keen thus far.
The EU’s chief Brexit negotiator, Michel Barnier, put the cat among the pigeons somewhat, saying – to London’s apparent surprise – that Britain would have less than 18 months to secure its article 50 divorce.
The Frenchman said the EU would need a few weeks to sort out its negotiating stance at the beginning of the article 50 process and a few months to ratify the agreement at the end. He also laid out the key principles of the bloc’s approach.
The EU would seek first and foremost to preserve the unity and interests of its 27 remaining members, he said, and would continue to refuse all negotiation before notification. Brexit must be a worse deal for Britain than EU membership, and curbs on free movement were not compatible with full access to the single market:
Barnier also said it was “difficult to imagine” an interim deal at present, without knowing exactly what kind of final deal the UK might want.
Elsewhere, Matteo Renzi’s defeat in a referendum on constitutional reform was greeted by Eurosceptics everywhere as another nail in the coffin of the EU. It was hardly a welcome development, but there was little to suggest the result had much to do with Europe: this was not Italy’s Brexit moment.
And just a few hours earlier, Alexander Van der Bellen, the overtly pro-European leftist candidate in Austria’s presidential elections, defeated Norbert Hofer, whose party was founded by a former SS officer, prompting heady talk of a post-Brexit bounce in support for the ailing European project.
With elections in the Netherlands, France and Germany, 2017 will tell us more.
Westminster’s focus this week was again partly directed elsewhere, on a byelection. But while last week’s upset in Richmond pointed to a remainers’ rebellion, Thursday’s vote in Lincolnshire’s Sleaford and Hykeham brought another message.
Yes, the Conservatives were expected to keep the strongly pro-leave seat, with Ukip maybe to finish second. The message, perhaps, came in the relegation of Labour from a strongish second to a miserable fourth, behind the Lib Dems.
As one alarmed Labour MP theorised, in trying to balance its Brexit strategy between the will of the 52% of leave voters and 48% of remainers, the party may have ended up annoying both and becoming “the party of the 0%”.
The warning did not seemingly focus minds in the party, where two senior MPs, Diane Abbott and Andy Burnham, spent the weekend saying precisely opposite things on post-Brexit freedom of movement.
The former party leader Ed Miliband also entered the fray, formally coming out for a softer Brexit, and saying limited curbs to immigration were a necessary price to pay for single market membership.
Elsewhere, some conspiracy-minded types have wondered whether the fuss over Theresa May’s leather trousers is an example of the dead cat strategy. More likely, it’s just an indicator of how poisonous relations have become between the PM and some of her more rebellious backbenchers.
The former education secretary Nicky Morgan was barred from a Downing Street Brexit meeting with May for talking disparagingly about the £995 trousers, a snub that escalated with the leak of furious texts between Morgan and May’s chief of staff. (More fashion-minded types thought the real scandal lay elsewhere: who wears baggy leather trousers?)
Matthew d’Ancona reckons Theresa May was pretty clever with her amendment in the Commons last week, and her article 50 ruse has caught the remainers off-guard:
In the FT (paywall), Jana Ganesh argues beautifully that Britain’s refusal to accept that continentals actually mean what they say is a cultural difference that is doing the UK no favours at all:
And back in the Guardian, Rafael Behr says May risks becoming an “accidental Europe-wrecker” by feeding a Ukip-inspired image of the EU:
If you missed it, Rupert Myers from GQ live-tweeted what really happened in the supreme court last week. It was quite a party.
Do read the full thread, you won’t regret it ...
Letters: After more than 300 years of asserting parliamentary supremacy, the ghost of royal tyranny returns to haunt us
Barack Obama has agreed to preserve the Senate’s landmark investigation into the CIA’s use of torture after 9/11, but his decision ensures that the document remains out of public view for at least 12 years and probably longer.
Obama’s decision, revealed in a letter from White House counsel W Neil Eggleston, prevents Republican Richard Burr, the Senate intelligence committee chairman who has been highly critical of the investigation, from destroying existing classified copies of the December 2014 report.
Daniel Jones, a former committee staffer who led the torture inquiry, criticized the preservation as inadequate.
“The bar for positive White House action on this is incredibly low. Preserving the full 6,700-page report under the Presidential Records Act only ensures the report will not be destroyed,” Jones said. “It does little else.”
The full Senate torture report, which documented brutality by the CIA against at least 119 detained terrorism suspects, will be held out of public view at Obama’s presidential library.
Democrat Dianne Feinstein of California, Burr’s predecessor as chair and now the vice-chair of the Senate intelligence committee, said on Monday she was “pleased” Obama had placed the inquiry she spearheaded into his presidential record. Feinstein noted the document would “one day be available for declassification”.
But that day, according to secrecy and intelligence experts, is a long way off.
Eggleston wrote to Feinstein on Friday that the classified version of the report, over 6,700 pages in length, will remain restricted under a legal provision, the Presidential Records Act, for 12 years.
“At this time, we are not pursuing declassification,” Eggleston wrote.
Under the act, the Senate torture report will be exempt from the Freedom of Information Act for a full 12 years. But expiration of the provision afterward does not mean that disclosure will necessarily follow.
“CIA or other agencies may contend that all or some of the classified information in the report is still classified 12 years from now,” said Steven Aftergood, an intelligence policy expert at the Federation of American Scientists. After 12 years, a declassification review of the torture report can proceed, “but the review may conclude that the information in it should remain classified”, Aftergood noted.
Through an investigation that lasted more than six years, the Senate intelligence committee found that the CIA’s torture was far more brutal than the agency had told the Bush administration or Congress, and that the agency had lied about the program’s contours and effectiveness. It found unequivocally that torture produced no valuable counter-terrorism intelligence. President-elect Donald Trump has repeatedly expressed a desire to make the CIA engage in torture once again.
Obama came to the aid of the CIA in its dramatic battle with its Senate overseers. The president defended the agency after its operatives surreptitiously spied on the emails and work product of the Senate’s lead investigator, Jones. Through the chief of staff, Denis McDonough, Obama’s White House fought for months throughout 2014 to ensure that the vast majority of the Senate report remained classified and out of public view.
“The administration can, and should, be doing much more,” Jones said.
“They have ignored requests from senators and others to declassify the full report. Worse, while the full 6,700-page classified report was delivered to the CIA, [office of the director of national intelligence], state, FBI, DOJ and DOD; we’re told individuals with the appropriate security clearances at these agencies have not been able to read the report and learn from the mistakes documented. It’s dumbfounding. The administration’s lack of support – and inaction – continues to be incredibly disappointing.”
Despite Obama’s decision, Senator Ron Wyden, an Oregon Democrat on the intelligence committee and an advocate of the report, pledged to build “a bipartisan coalition” starting next month to declassify the report as a measure to check Trump’s pro-torture impulses.
“The American people deserve the opportunity to read this history rather than see it locked away in a safe for twelve years. When the president-elect has promised to bring back torture, it is also more critical than ever that the study be made available to cleared personnel throughout the federal government who are responsible for authorizing and implementing our country’s detention and interrogation policies,” Wyden said.
Wyden urged Obama to designate the torture report an agency record, which makes it releasable under the Freedom of Information Act, adding: “Burying the study achieves nothing but to create an information vacuum that gets filled with uninformed and highly dangerous propaganda.”
When the high court ruled on the use of the royal prerogative in relation to triggering article 50 we saw an unprecedented attack on the judiciary. Independent judges were labelled “enemies of the people” by the Daily Mail, and publicly lambasted for simply doing their job.
It is the duty of judges to impartially interpret the law, and it is the duty of the lord chancellor, Liz Truss, to unequivocally defend the law. As the supreme court ruling on the use of the royal prerogative approaches, we hope the lord chancellor will not be so shy this time around to vocally defend the independent judiciary.
The people of the UK voted to leave the EU, and this process must be carried out with integrity. Crucially, in exiting the EU we must not undermine our existing democratic structures, or inadvertently weaken the checks and balances on government.
An independent and transparent judiciary is a cornerstone of our democracy, acting as an essential check on power – in this case the very matter at hand is where decision-making powers lie. If our judicial system becomes subject to the whims of politicians and those who shout the loudest, we risk constitutional chaos.
The supreme court’s judgment will no doubt be controversial. If the government once again fails to convincingly defend the independent judiciary an alarming precedent will be set, and it will be hard to ignore the damage done to our democracy.
Alexandra Runswick Director, Unlock Democracy, Stephen Bowen Director, British Institute of Human Rights, Simon Burall Director, Involve Foundation, Professor Graham Smith Director of the Centre for the Study of Democracy, University of Westminster, Professor Dibyesh Anand Head of the Department of Politics and International Relations, University of Westminster, Professor Andrew Le Sueur Professor of constitutional justice, University of Essex, Geoffrey Payne Barrister at law, 25 Bedford Row Chambers, Antony Hook Barrister at law, Great James Street Chambers
• It is deeply discouraging to see Simon Jenkins (Opinion, 8 December) of all people joining the populist element currently engaged in bashing the judiciary. The supreme court in the Brexit case will not, as he says, be giving a judgment “about the utility of a one-clause bill”. They will be deciding the important constitutional question of whether the executive has the legal power to trigger article 50 or whether the law requires that it be done by parliament by statute. To go on to say that leavers “would be correct” in suspecting that “they are up against a London mafia of bad-loser judges … out to use every trick in the book to cheat the public of its decision” is a calumny. As it happens, whichever way it goes, the decision in this case will have no effect on implementation of Brexit. 
Michael Zander QC
Emeritus professor, LSE
• Simon Jenkins makes the dangerous assertion that Brexiters would be right in suspecting that “they are up against a London mafia of bad loser judges” saying that “What the judges should do instead is turn the case back on parliament”. But that’s exactly what they’ve done. Judges hear the cases brought before them. The government agreed that this was a case the courts should hear. There was no dispute that the court should decide on this tricky point of law. The government then pursued its right of appeal. So the issue is back with the supreme court. This is our system: an independent judiciary reminding parliament how legally to exercise its sovereignty – not telling MPs how to vote, just saying do it legally. It is time that Simon Jenkins, the Mail and the Telegraph realised that vilifying the judges and seeking to undermine judicial independence is a very dangerous step. The UK has a precious reputation for the rule of law and access to justice. We must not abandon that vital protection for all citizens. 
Diana Good
London
• We must not confuse democracy with mob rule. David Cameron’s commitment to enact the referendum verdict was democratic, if reckless, only because he was the prime minister. His decision does not imply that sovereignty has been transferred from the Queen-in-parliament to public opinion. If our present parliament thinks Brexit is against the national interest, it must dump it without hesitation and at the next election the public can vote accordingly, if it is still unpersuaded that parliament was right. Whatever certain journals may wish it to be, that is our democratic system.
Rod Tipple
Cambridge
• After more than 300 years of asserting parliamentary supremacy, the ghost of royal tyranny returns to haunt us. The supreme court considers a royal prerogative to leave (Report, 6 December), but what about when we’ve left?
The element of “repeal” in the misnomered great “repeal” bill will take the form of a Henry VIII clause, named for the king who, with the Statute of Proclamations 1539, made his word have the force of law. The clause will enable government ministers to repeal or amend primary legislation through a secondary act with limited or no further parliamentary scrutiny. Ministers will be handed the axe and given the chance to divorce, or behead our rights based on EU law.
The Statute of Proclamations was repealed with Henry VIII’s death. This country decided that no man, not even a king, should have the power to make, amend or repeal primary legislation without parliament. Now I fear we’ll be haunted by another royal ghost even if the supreme court dismisses the current one.
Joelle Grogan
Department of Law, Middlesex University
• You say the “urgent job” is to press for a soft Brexit, but that implies premature defeatism about the possibility of averting Brexit altogether, a challenging but still not impossible task (Editorial, 3 December). The demand for parliament or the electorate to have the final say on any agreement with the EU27 (the rest of the EU) negotiated after article 50 has been triggered is incompatible with article 50. The government’s summary of its legal case in the supreme court says “an article 50 notification is irrevocable and cannot be given conditionally”. So when the two years for negotiations are up, we’ll be out of the EU, either with an obviously unpalatable agreement, or, if our government or parliament rejects whatever agreement’s on offer, without any agreement at all – the worst possible outcome. There will be no option after the trigger to reject any agreement and remain in the EU under the existing terms.
The choice between hard and soft Brexit will be made for us by the EU27 once article 50 is triggered. The task now is to convince public opinion that on the emerging evidence, mostly unavailable at the time of the referendum, any kind of achievable Brexit will be worse for ordinary working Britons than remaining in the EU and urgently tackling the grievances that led millions to vote to leave. Once Theresa May triggers article 50, it will be too late. We need to do everything possible to ensure that the trigger is postponed long enough for the British people to exercise their democratic right to change their minds and call off Brexit altogether.
Brian Barder
London
• Simon Jenkins is mistaken in stating that “the judges should tell the MPs they caused this mess”. Our problems with the EU have longer, more deeply rooted origins than sloppy work in parliament but we are where we are and now need all the wise counsel we can get. We need it from judges, from businessmen, from social workers, from scientists – in short from the whole of the society that this decision will affect.
To allow such a serious matter to be reduced to a quarrel between the nationalist and the business wings of the Tory party is a grave mistake. That is why it has been so disturbing to see the Labour party flunking its duty as an opposition and not exposing all these questions to consideration. 
Dr Martin Rosendaal
London
• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters
Letters: After more than 300 years of asserting parliamentary supremacy, the ghost of royal tyranny returns to haunt us
Brexit could undermine London’s status as a highly profitable international legal centre, according to the Bar Council, which represents barristers in England and Wales.
The warning comes as lawyers seeking to prevent the UK from leaving the single market by upholding the right to remain in the European Economic Area (EEA) formally lodged notice on Monday of a fresh appeal against the government at the high court.
Peter Wilding, the man credited with inventing the term Brexit in 2012, said the group British Influence expected that its claim against the Department for Exiting the European Union could be heard as early as next February.
The Bar Council’s report, The Brexit Papers, is intended to draw the government’s attention to the financial and professional dangers of removing the UK entirely from close relationships with European jurisdictions.
“The reputation of England and Wales as the pre-eminent destination for international dispute resolution will be damaged if appropriate steps are not taken to ensure that the position as to the jurisdiction of the English courts and the enforcement of English judgments are protected,” the Bar Council working party led by Hugh Mercer QC says.
“A great deal of the attractiveness of the UK in general, and London in particular, as a hub for business (particularly financial services) … will be considerably diminished if steps are not taken to ensure an adequate legal framework is put in place to ensure that English judgments and jurisdiction clauses are effectively and efficiently enforced.”
The report refers to cases in which claimants are being advised not to choose English jurisdiction clauses in their contracts where previously they would have been almost an automatic choice. Some cases that would normally be launched in England are being started in other EU jurisdictions due to uncertainty over the ultimate enforceability of English judgments.
The UK legal services market generates £25.7bn a year in revenue and employs 370,000 people. It produced £3.3bn of net export revenue last year.
In the short to medium term Brexit may benefit lawyers whose legal advice is sought in a period of uncertainty, but the long-term prospects are not as good. 
“The enduring international appeal of the UK for its legal standing will depend on the ability of UK lawyers to provide legal services, including representation, to clients across the EU and elsewhere,” the Bar Council says.
British Influence, one of whose founders was the Labour peer Peter Mandelson, is launching its legal challenge against the government department headed by David Davis. Lord Mandelson is no longer involved with the group. 
The government and the European commission maintain that the UK will leave the EEA at the moment it leaves the EU. 
Article 127 of the EEA agreement requires contracting parties, which include the UK, to give at least 12 months’ notice before leaving. That suggests a separate departure process from article 50 of the EU treaty, which was disputed in the supreme court.
British Influence pointed to the European Economic Area Act 1993, which enshrines the EEA in UK domestic law.
“We note that the Conservative party general election manifesto of 2015 commits to keeping Britain in the single market,” British Influence said. “Just as the Conservative party promised to hold a referendum and honour the result, then, it also effectively promised to keep us in the single market. Leaving the EU is compatible with remaining in the single market.”
Peter Wilding said: “This is not stopping Brexit, this is shaping it. The country demands a win-win, smart Brexit, not a lose-lose ideological hard Brexit which will damage the UK, damage Europe and for which there is no need and no mandate. 
“I support the article 127 campaign because we need to lead, not leave, the common market, which the UK founded. Continued membership of the common market was a Conservative manifesto promise, respects the referendum red lines and avoids the cliff edge which British business fears. So staying in the single market helps not hinders the government.”
Responding to the latest legal threat, a government spokesman said: “The UK is party to the EEA agreement only in its capacity as an EU member state. Once the UK leaves the EU, the EEA agreement will automatically cease to apply to the UK.”
More than 800 magistrates have resigned in England and Wales since April, prompting warnings that the voluntary court service is facing a crisis in morale.
Figures released in a written parliamentary answer revealed that 842 magistrates have left the bench since the beginning of the financial year; a further 952 stood down during the year 2015-16.
Since April 2010, there have been a total of 8,253 resignations, the justice minister Sir Oliver Heald said. 
Court closures, falling crime rates and a relative increase in the number of full-time district judges have all been blamed for the decline. Over the past decade the number of unpaid justices of the peace has dropped from 30,000 in 2006 to 17,500 today.
Commenting on the accelerating rate of departures, Malcolm Richardson, national chairman of the Magistrates’ Association, the independent charity that represent JPs in England and Wales, said: “With approximately 95% of all criminal cases dealt with by magistrates, it’s worrying that resignations have reached this level. 
“Like any role in unpaid public service, magistrates leave the bench for a variety of reasons, yet budget cuts, court closures and a sense of being under-valued are frequently cited as reasons for going.
“Considering the magistracy is the central pillar of criminal justice in England and Wales we urge the government to work with us to solve the problem. The system is not in crisis, as some claim, but if the causes for resignations are not dealt with it may well be in the near future.”
In the written answer, Heald said: “This government values the judiciary greatly. A strong, independent judiciary is essential for a modern, democratic society and we do not take for granted the central role judges play in upholding the rule of law and delivering justice. Our judges and magistrates are rightly held in high regard around the world. Magistrate remains a sought after role and competition for vacancies tends to be strong.”
Around 250 magistrates courts, youth courts and county courts have closed since 2010 as part of a coordinated cost-cutting drive. The Ministry of Justice (MoJ) argues that 95% of defendants should be able to reach their local court within an hour by car. Keeping to the speed limit, that implies many will be up to 70 miles away.
The Conservative MP Bob Neill, who chairs the justice select committee, said in October: “It is unfortunate that the government’s evident goodwill towards the magistracy has not yet been translated into any meaningful strategy for supporting and developing it within a changing criminal justice system. This needs to be addressed as a matter of urgency.
“Although evidence does not indicate a universal problem, there is sufficient evidence of low morale within the magistracy to cause concern.”
Earlier this month an MoJ spokesperson said: “Closing underused and dilapidated court buildings will allow us to reinvest in the justice system and make the best use of technology. This will improve access to justice and improve the experience for all court users, in particular vulnerable victims and witnesses.”
A British couple have won a legal fight to be reunited with their children after being arrested on suspicion of trying to travel to Syria to join Islamic State.
The couple, from the north-east of England, were arrested at the Eurotunnel terminal at Folkestone on 10 July 2015 on suspicion of preparing terrorist acts and child cruelty or neglect. Their teenage son and two younger children were in the back of the car and later told police they did not know where they had been going.
The parents always insisted they were going on a surprise weekend away in the German Alps, where they planned to hike and “taste the local pastries”. No evidence was ever found that they had made any direct communication with anyone living in Syria or in Isis-controlled territories.
When told that police thought the family were heading to Syria, the teenager reportedly said: “Oh my days, I never thought that my dad would really go to Syria or Morocco or somewhere like that.”
The three children were placed in foster care for four months but were returned to their parents in November 2015.
A high court judge has now ruled they can stay together as a family, along with their new baby sibling.
Mr Justice Cobb said he was not convinced the family had been going for a weekend away in Germany, but he believed the attitudes of the parents had “genuinely changed” after they took part in an extensive deradicalisation programme.
Suspicions about the family were raised four months before their arrest at Folkestone, when the father posted a picture on Facebook of a man with whom he had been in an altercation, calling him an “apostate”.
He was arrested on suspicion of publishing threatening written material intending to stir up religious hatred.
The family home was searched and a number of electronic devices were seized. Analysis of videos, documents and social media communications aroused concern that the parents supported forms of Islamic extremism, terrorism and jihadi activity, and that they had associations with proscribed terrorist organisations with connections in Syria and Iraq.
Among the material found was a picture of a woman and children being hanged over a bridge, a video of a captured Jordanian pilot being executed, and The Book of Jihad by Abi Zakaryya.
The father was a member of a WhatsApp group that included various suspected terrorists and criminals, and on which he praised the actions of a leading al-Qaida figure who was allegedly responsible for several terrorist attacks, dispatching suicide bombers, and the beheading of hostages.
The father was interviewed by police but he offered no comment. The police formed the view that the father was associated or connected with al-Muhajiroun, a proscribed organisation.
The father denied this and told police he had been researching the attitudes of those who espoused radical or extreme Islamic views. He was never charged with any terror offence.
The mother had retweeted messages from a well-known Islamic extremist preacher as well as pictures of men in orange boiler suits being prepared for death, under the banner: “This is the recompense for every spy helping to kill innocent Muslims #Isis #IS”.
In his fact-finding ruling, Cobb said the parents’ claim that they had been going for a weekend away was “wholly unconvincing”, partly because of their behaviour en route and also because of how much they had packed.
Shortly before reaching the Eurotunnel terminal, the parents pulled into a supermarket car park off the motorway to change out of their traditional Muslim clothing. The mother removed her abaya and niqab, and the father changed his T-shirt and shaved off his long beard.
The mother had not been without a scarf or hijab since she was 16; she said she had never known the father without a beard. The father had been to Germany at least four times in the previous 15 years, and on no previous occasion had he shaved his beard, the judge said.
In the back of the car was “a substantial quantity of clothes for all seasons”, despite the alleged holiday taking place in mid-summer, plus 17 pairs of male boxer shorts, more than 40 pairs of socks, approximately 30 pairs of knickers, 17 baby-grows, a black balaclava, 112 sanitary towels, multiple razors, refills and shavers, sun creams and deodorants as well as several sim cards.
The parents were carrying £3,000 in cash, £2,000 of which the father had raised in the weeks before the trip by selling items on eBay, many of which he didn’t appear to own and none of which he ever sent to the purchasers.
Before leaving their home they gave away their family pet.
Concluding his judgment, Cobb acknowledged “a risk that the parents have simply complied superficially” with the deradicalisation programme and that “once the proceedings are over and the glare of social work interest has faded, they will revert to their previous views and behaviours”.
But he said: “There is now good evidence that the parents reject their previous ideological beliefs, which they now acknowledge to have been extreme and unorthodox; there is no evidence that they have in any sense indoctrinated [the two older children, who] have a much more resilient attitude to extreme ideology than previously.”
The last three Conservative lord chancellors have been blamed for “bringing the custodial system to the brink of collapse” by the former head of the prison and probation services in England and Wales.
Writing for the Guardian Phil Wheatley, the former chief executive of the National Offender Management Service and director general of the prison service, said it would “take years to put right” but the role of successive Conservative justice secretaries needed to be openly acknowledged and understood “if there is to be any chance of recovering from the current disaster”.
Wheatley explicitly blamed Ken Clarke, Chris Grayling and Michael Gove for bringing the custodial system to a state of “operational disaster” as a direct result of deep budget cuts and wild swings in government policy.
“This current crisis is a failure of major proportions for the government. Managing prisons is a difficult and highly skilled task that requires adequate resourcing and a stable policy environment. Since 2010 the government has failed on both counts,” he wrote.
He said the current lord chancellor, Elizabeth Truss, deserved credit for quickly recognising that prison staffing levels were too low to maintain safety or security, managing to secure Treasury backing to partially reverse jail staffing cuts by recruiting an extra 2,500 prison officers, and launching a prison safety reform programme.
The unprecedented intervention by Wheatley, who retired in 2010 and was succeeded by Michael Spurr, highlights deep concern that the prison crisis will not easily be put right – with dire consequences for prisoners, staff and the public.
He said when the coalition came to power in 2010, prisons were already dangerously overcrowded “despite advice on the risks, making it necessary for me to refuse outright to comply with their wishes”. He retired and his successor has had to deal with the bigger challenge of cuts to an unprotected budget compounded by “successive lord chancellors introducing their own radically different policies for prisons”.
Wheatley said Clarke, the first coalition lord chancellor, accepted deep budget cuts for the justice ministry on the basis he could reduce the prison population and put public sector prisons out to tender. But two years later David Cameron removed him for not being seen to be tough on prisoners.
Grayling followed with a brief to be a tough justice secretary without cutting jail numbers and no extra funding. Grayling abandoned the prison competition plans and instead announced his own reform programme across prison and probation. Wheatley said Grayling’s plans “threatened the stability and safety of prisons” but were considered essential to deliver the funding cuts without attracting tabloid criticism in the run-up to the 2015 general election.
According to Wheatley, Gove, the third Conservative lord chancellor, “charmed penal reformers by rubbishing most” of Grayling’s policies. But when Gove proposed his own reform vision of more liberal treatment of prisoners and individual freedom for governors, he ignored the predicament prisons were actually in. A third reorganisation of the NOMS in five years was ordered.
“Gove was, of course, gone before he had to take responsibility for the disruption caused both by his abandonment of Grayling’s policies and his abject failure to engage with their consequences,” said Wheatley.
He said the “operational disaster” that Truss inherited was a result of the continued budget reductions and swings in government policy. He said the result has been the loss of experienced prison managers and staff, too few prison officers of any sort, wages that make it difficult to recruit and retain staff, and cuts in prisoner programmes.
“The situation is now so parlous and will only be resolved by a prolonged period of policy stability and investment. It will take years to put right,” Wheatley wrote. He said the current leaders of the prison service had struggled to deliver what was required of them by politicians who, in turn, had been told what risks they were running.
“The responsibility of ministers in bringing our custodial system to the brink of collapse needs to be understood and openly acknowledged if there is to be any chance of recovering from the current disaster,” he warned.
The current crisis in our prisons is a matter of deep concern. It is an indictment of government policy in recent years, and will not be easily put right. It is vital that politicians understand and address what led us here if it is to be repaired. Without that, the crisis will deepen – with inevitable and dire consequences for prisoners, staff and the public.
I retired as chief executive of the National Offender Management Service (Noms) and director general of the Prison Service in June 2010, at which point the service was performing strongly. Suicides, escapes and serious incidents of disorder were at an all-time low, and the published statistics showed there had been more than 10% improvement in reoffending since 2000.
This was achieved despite the distraction of significant organisational upheavals initiated by ministers as they created and then reformed the National Offender Management Service.
The government’s unwillingness to fund the increases in the prison population that were driven by their obsession with pursuing populist law and order policies also caused problems. Ministers saw no problem with overcrowding to dangerous levels despite advice on the risks, making it necessary for me to refuse outright to comply with their wishes.
My successor, Michael Spurr, has faced even bigger challenges as a consequence of the severe budget reductions. This has been compounded by successive Conservative lord chancellors introducing their own radically different policies for prisons. Ken Clarke, the first lord chancellor in the coalition government, accepted a budget for justice that required substantial savings. He did so on the basis that it would be manageable if he both reduced the prison population and competitively tendered all public sector prisons over the lifetime of the government.
Just over two years later, David Cameron removed Clarke after political and tabloid press criticism of his proposals to reduce the prison population and his apparent unwillingness to be tough on prisoners.
Chris Grayling came next, with a brief to toughen up prison conditions without reducing the numbers and with no additional funding. The competitive tendering process was immediately abandoned. In its place, Grayling announced a programme of significant reforms across the prison and probation service.
The plans threatened the stability and safety of prisons but they were essential to meet the short-term political objective of managing within the planned budget while not reducing the prison population and not attracting tabloid criticism in the run-up to the 2015 election. It is a tribute to the skill of the Noms leadership and management that it delivered what Grayling required.
He was succeeded by Michael Gove, who charmed penal reformers by rubbishing most of his predecessor’s policies and making clear he had no taste for firm, centralised management. Ignoring the predicament prisons were in, Gove’s seductive policy vision was of liberal treatment for prisoners and freedom for individual governors to do their own thing.
Yet another major reorganisation of Noms was required: the third such upheaval in five years. Gove, of course, was gone before he had to take responsibility for the disruption caused both by his abandonment of Grayling’s policies and his abject failure to engage with their consequences.
Liz Truss now has the misfortune to inherit the operational disaster that is the direct result of these continued budget reductions and wild swings in government policy. The policies pursued by her predecessors have led to the loss of experienced prison managers and staff, too few prison officers of any sort, wages that make it difficult to recruit and retain staff, and a reduction in privileges and access to treatment interventions and regime activities that have been corrosive for prisoners. The situation is now parlous and will only be resolved by a prolonged period of policy stability and investment. It will take years to put right.
It is to Truss’s credit that she has quickly recognised that prison staffing levels are too low to maintain safety or security. It remains to be seen whether she also understands that prisons work best when they are not subjected to fluctuating political whims and have strong, effective management.
So far she has proposed league tables, more budgetary freedom for prison governors and accountability for hitting agreed performance targets, all of which is sensible and marks a return to the system we operated prior to 2010.
The organisational changes she is making are less encouraging. The process of recovery from the current crisis will require effective support services geared to meet the operational needs of prisons so that personnel, finance and procurement are integral to the management effort to resolve the problems faced. The minister however has transferred control of these services to the Ministry of Justice, so they will be managed by staff who have no experience of the operational challenges faced by prisons. It is highly likely that this will hamper the recovery effort.
There are no quick fixes that will easily rebuild the morale and confidence of staff. It is essential that ministers now refrain from whizzy political initiatives, and create a period of organisational and policy stability. This will allow the very competent managers of our prisons to concentrate on the core business of restoring order and constructive activity in our prisons.
This current crisis is a failure of major proportions for the government. Managing prisons is a difficult and highly skilled task that requires adequate resourcing, and a stable policy environment.
In the period since May 2010 the government has failed on both counts. The current leaders and managers of the Prison Service have struggled to deliver what has been required of them by politicians who have been told what risks they were running. The responsibility of ministers in bringing our custodial system to the brink of collapse needs to be understood and openly acknowledged if there is to be any chance of recovering from the current disaster.
Three animal charities are fighting to preserve almost £500,000 left to them by a woman, who cut her estranged daughter out of her will, in a test case being heard at the supreme court on Monday.
The protracted dispute over Melita Jackson’s inheritance has made its way through the English courts since her death, at 70, in 2004.
The final judgment, which is not expected until next year, will decide whether it is reasonable for parents to leave their wealth to charities if they fail to make adequate provision for their offspring.
Jackson’s only child, Heather Ilott, was rejected by her mother at 17 after she left home in 1978 to live with her boyfriend, Nicholas Ilott, whom she later married. 
Attempts at reconciliation failed, and when Jackson died 12 years ago her will made no provision for her daughter, by then a mother of five, who has no pension and was on state benefits.
Most of the £486,000 estate was left to the Blue Cross, the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds and the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals. 
In 2007, the county court awarded Ilott £50,000 on the grounds that her mother had acted in an “unreasonable, capricious and harsh” way towards her.
Ilott, from Great Munden, Hertfordshire, challenged the award. In 2011, the court of appeal decided that sum was insufficient. Judges then warned that further costly litigation would eat into the value of the estate. 
Last year the court of appeal ruled that Ilott should receive £164,000.
Ilott, who is in her 50s, made an application under the Inheritance (Provision for Family and Dependants) Act 1975 for “reasonable financial provision” from her mother’s estate.
The act confers the right on a child of a deceased parent to apply for an order if a will does not make reasonable provision for their maintenance. 
The delays are reminiscent of the disputed will of Jarndyce v Jarndyce in Charles Dickens’ novel Bleak House.
In the latest hearing, the charities are seeking clarification of the rules under the 1975 act. It is being heard by a panel of seven supreme court justices, headed by Lord Neuberger. Judgment will be reserved.
The three charities said they had pursued their claim in order to “affirm the importance of testamentary freedom and secure crucial guidance for the future”. 
In a statement they explained: “The charities have appealed this decision in order to obtain essential clarity from the Supreme Court regarding the scope of the court’s power to interfere with a person’s testamentary wishes using the 1975 Act.”
Paula Myers, head of the will trust and estate disputes team at the law firm Irwin Mitchell, said of the court of appeal decision: “The ruling potentially made it easier for adult children who have been left out of wills to challenge them if they have not been left a reasonable provision and we have seen a rise in inquiries from people who feel that they have been unfairly disinherited.”
Geoffrey Kertesz, partner and head of will and trust disputes at Bircham Dyson Bell, said: “The court of appeal made its decision on narrow grounds and seemed principally concerned with providing Mrs Ilott, who is in straitened financial circumstances, with housing in a manner that preserved her state benefits. 
“The larger, practical implication of the decision is that, irrespective of the relationship between a parent and estranged child, it has become significantly more difficult to disinherit a child.
“The case seems to have created an ‘Ilott effect’, as we are seeing an increase in Inheritance Act claims brought by adult children and against charitable beneficiaries. Unless the supreme court overturns the decision, claims of this nature will only become more common.”
The Crimean peninsula, annexed by Russia in 2014, has swiftly degenerated into the scene of the greatest repression being conducted anywhere in the entire country.
The targets of the Kremlin’s crackdown are the Crimean Tatars, the ethnic group that originally formed the Crimean nation on the Black Sea peninsula. Between the 13th and 18th centuries the Tatars enjoyed their own state, and since 2014 they have been campaigning to return their homeland to Ukrainian rule. For this they have become the collective enemy of Russia.
They are now victims of hate and persecution, and not for the first time in their tragic history. In May 1944, Joseph Stalin ordered the mass resettlement of Tatars, after accusing them of collaborating with the Nazis. At the time they made up about a fifth of the total population of the Crimeanpeninsula. More than 230,000 people, including almost the entire Crimean Tatar population, were deported, mostly to Uzbekistan.
Those who survived the deportation were only allowed to return after perestroika 45 years later. Even then, communist authorities gave them a hostile reception.
But after 25 years in independent Ukraine, the Tatars had rebuilt their communities from scratch. They formed the only nation in the former Soviet Union with its own democratic governing body, the mejlis, with no help from the state.
Thanks to this elected body and its long-time head, , a Soviet-era dissident, Crimean Tatars became semi-autonomous within Ukraine, while supporting the country’s pro-European leanings.
In 2014, the Tatars boycotted the sham and illegal referendum organised by Russia. The Kremlin hailed the result as a “vote” for Crimea to join the Russian Federation. This dissent kickstarted a new and brutal phase of Tatar oppression.
Today, less than 300,000 people – below 15% of the peninsula’s population – is Tatar. In the two years since annexation more than 21,000 Tatars have left because of an intensifying atmosphere of hatred and repression, and the exodus shows no signs of slowing.
The nature of this repression is highlighted by the fact that more than 90% of those in prison in the region are accused of political crimes. A large majority of those declared missing since the annexation are from the Tatar community.
Mejlis leaders such as Dzhemilev and Refat Chubarov, alongside other public figures and journalists of Tatar origin, have been forced to leave Crimea, prohibited from visiting their homeland by Russia.
The first signs of the crackdown started in 2014, when Tatars were forbidden from holding mass gatherings, even on 18 May, the official day for commemorating the 1944 deportations.
In spring 2015, the Russian authorities banned Tatar TV channels and press outlets. ATR, the Crimean Tatar TV channel, was closed down, as well as the radio station Meydan FM and even a children’s TV channel, Lale.
Since then, the situation has become increasingly dangerous, to the point that parents now accompany their children to school for fear of abduction. Young Tatar are even told not to wear clothes with ethnic elements. Last year, Nariman Jelyalov, the deputy president of the mejlis, published a personal safety manual, recommending Tatars only move around in groups in well-lit public places.
In order to maintain the atmosphere of fear among Tatars, Russian security forces – complete with dogs and armed masked men – have been conducting regular raids. People are fined, arrested and put on trial en masse for anything that reminds the Russian authorities of the existence of Crimean Tatars, from national flags to supposedly banned literature.
Last month, the entire system of Crimean Tatar self-rule, comprising more than 2,000 elected delegates, was declared to be an extremist organisation by the supreme court of Russia, and participating members are now being threatened with incarceration for taking part in “illegal gatherings”.
For his support for the territorial integrity of his country, Akhtem Chiygoz, the deputy chairman of the mejlis, has been in prison for 18 months, while Ilmi Umerov, a former head of the Bakhchisarai district administration, the ancient capital of the Crimean Tatars, was put in a psychiatric ward for a humiliating psychiatric examination. He was eventually found sane.
There are now more than 20 Crimean Tatars in Russian prisons, and the number is steadily increasing. Others have faced kidnap, and even death. The most infamous abduction in Crimea happened in May, when a group of people in military uniforms abducted Ervin Ibragimov, one of the leaders of the World Congress of Crimean Tatars, in front of CCTV cameras. His fate is unknown. Many in the Tatar community presume he is dead.
There are no barbed-wire fences in this new hybrid ghetto of Vladimir Putin’s – yet. Instead of wire there is hate-filled TV propaganda, total surveillance and constant harassment.
The Tatars have been picked for the outcast role. Russian authorities in Crimea are busy erecting monuments to the persecutors of the Tatars: Stalin and Catherine the Great. Crimean Tatars are afraid to speak to journalists and human rights activists – and to each other. Meanwhile, their neighbours are busy writing reports to the authorities and want to know when the Tatars will get the hell out of “our Russian Crimea”.
Crimean Tatars are banned from speaking their native language at work. If they use it outside their own areas people insult them. Parents from Russian and other non-Tatar families prefer to limit their and their children’s contacts with Crimean Tatars.
There is a tradition in “Russian Crimea”: military helicopters circle low above homes during raids carried out on dates that mark tragic events in Crimean Tatar history. They do it for no apparent reasons – just to make the windows shake.
I do not know how many people in Crimea must be killed, driven out and deprived of human dignity before a world that once conquered fascism stands up and defends Crimean Tatars. The international community could, for example, introduce special sanctions to punish Russia for bringing Nazi practices back to Europe.
I know that until that is done, the situation will become catastrophically worse. And in years to come, many will feel ashamed for staying silent today.
Amazon has been accused of creating “intolerable working conditions” after allegations that workers have been penalised for sick days and that some are camping near one of its warehouses to save money commuting to work.
Willie Rennie, the Liberal Democrat leader in Scotland, said Amazon should be “ashamed” that workers at its warehouse in Dunfermline have chosen to camp outside in the winter.
He made the comments after the the Courier newspaper published photographs of tents near the site that it said were being lived in by Amazon workers. It said at least three tents were pitched close to the warehouse by the M90 in Dunfermline and that a man living in one of them had said he was an employee who usually lives in Perth.
A Sunday Times investigation found that temporary workers at the warehouse were being penalised for taking time off sick and put under pressure to hit targets for picking orders. It also claimed that although workers could walk up to 10 miles a day doing their jobs, water dispensers were regularly empty.
Amazon has hired 20,000 agency workers for the peak Christmas season, more than doubling its workforce. Staff have to pay to catch an agency-provided bus to the Dunfermline site.
Rennie has repeatedly called for the firm to improve conditions at its Dunfermline site and said the latest claim “chimes with the feedback I have received from local people over a long period of time”.
He said: “It confirms that Amazon have created intolerable working conditions for many. The company don’t seem to be interested in keeping workers for too long as they work them until they drop. They have generated an oppressive culture where management and some workers put undue pressure on workers.
“It’s time for Amazon to finally change their ways. That means a change to wages and to working conditions.”
Rennie said the firm should be “ashamed that they pay their workers so little that they have to camp out in the dead of winter to make ends meet”.
Amazon, which has 12 fulfilment centres around the UK, has come under fire in the past for its treatment of workers, many of whom are employed through agencies. Three years ago, an undercover reporter for the Observer wrote about the long hours and physical work carried out for low pay, while more recently unions have claimed that workers are falling ill as a result.
Online job forums have reviews by former workers which describe being expected to “work like robots” and “paranoia with job security”. Workers say overtime is compulsory and holidays banned in the busy months of November and December.
When questioned about the tents, Amazon said it “provides a safe and positive workplace with competitive pay and benefits from day one”.
It added: “We are proud to have been able to create several thousand new permanent roles in our UK fulfilment centres over the last five years. One of the reasons we’ve been able to attract so many people to join us is that we offer great jobs and a positive work environment with opportunities for growth.
“We offer associates a range of roles in our fulfilment centres, depending on their preferences. Some roles involve walking a number of miles each day, a fact we make clear during the recruitment process. Many associates seek these positions as they enjoy the active nature of the work. There are many opportunities for people who prefer less active roles.
“As with nearly all companies, we expect a certain level of performance from our associates. Productivity targets are set objectively, based on previous performance levels achieved by our workforce.”
The company said it analysed wages every year to ensure they were competitive. All permanent and temporary Amazon workers start on £7.35 an hour or more and earn at least £11 an hour for overtime. There are paid 30-minute lunch breaks and subsidised meals. The new national living wage is £7.20 for workers aged over 25.
Water is readily available for staff as they performed their duties, Amazon said, and it has a “fair and predictable system to record staff attendance and take into account individual circumstances”.
Michael Newman, an employment lawyer at Leigh Day, said that it was legal for companies to have a policy which meant that workers were effectively penalised if they were off sick. “Absence policies are definitely becoming stricter – one example would be having a bonus or ‘attendance allowance’ that is then forfeited if the worker is off sick,” he said.
“Amazon’s policy doesn’t seem particularly unusual though – the important thing is to distinguish between days off, and periods of absence. It is usually the latter that counts for unfair dismissal purposes, although many policies look at both how long you are off for, and how many times you are off.”
The Labour MP Frank Field, who has been campaigning against poor conditions for self-employed workers, said the government-ordered review into working practices should issue an interim report.
“Inquiries take time but over that time the injustices are growing,” he said. “There have been reports on Hermes and Uber done by my office, and now the Sunday Times investigation – there is enough information out there.”
Amendments to crime bill include anonymity for victims of disclosure of intimate images
A British-Algerian journalist has died after staging a hunger strike in protest against a two-year jail term for offending Algeria’s president in a poem posted online, according to his lawyer.
“I can confirm the death of the journalist Mohamed Tamalt in Bab el-Oued hospital after a hunger strike of more than three months and a three-month coma,” Amine Sidhoum said on Facebook.
The prison service said in a statement Tamalt had died of a lung infection for which he was receiving treatment since it was detected on 4 December. He had been in hospital since the end of August. Tamalt, a dual national, launched the hunger strike on the day of his arrest near his parents’ house in the capital Algiers on 27 June, according to Human Rights Watch.
The 42-year-old blogger and freelance journalist, who ran a website from London where he lived, was charged with offending President Abdelaziz Bouteflika and defaming a public authority, in the poem he shared on Facebook. A court in Algiers sentenced him to two years in prison on 11 July and fined him 200,000 dinars (£1,400). An appeals court upheld the ruling a month later.
Amnesty International urged Algerian authorities on Sunday to open an “independent and transparent investigation into the circumstances” of the journalist’s death.
Media watchdog Reporters Without Borders (RSF) said it was shocked by Tamalt’s death which had dealt a blow to freedom of information in Algeria. “Why was there such a conviction just for words on Facebook which did no harm to anyone?” said Yasmine Kacha, head of the north Africa department of RSF.
HRW had urged Algerian authorities to release him in August when he was reportedly in critical condition. “The Algerian authorities should quash the case against Tamalt and send the message that free speech will be respected in Algeria,” it said at the time.
UK businesses will have to deal with 60m more pieces of paperwork each year if Britain leaves the customs union as it departs the EU, according to research from a group campaigning to keep trade links with the bloc after Brexit.
According to Open Britain, a hard Brexit could spark an “avalanche of paperwork” if thousands of importing and exporting businesses were forced to fill out similar forms to those required in moving goods and services beyond the union.
The claim comes as the government faces another potential legal challenge to its Brexit plans, this time from two campaigners who are seeking a judicial review in the high court to keep Britain in the single market.
Under the EU customs union, which deals with rules relating to trade, unified tariffs are levied on imports to the whole area, meaning no new charges or associated paperwork are needed for goods shipped between members.
According to Open Britain, which has support from remain MPs in the three main Westminster parties, customs data shows that last year the UK made 70.5m import declarations and 6.5m export declarations over trade in non-EU goods.
The group says that if leaving the customs union involved a similar level of customs paperwork, it would require businesses to complete more than 45m import declarations and 15m export declarations every year.
This contradicts the arguments of pro-Brexit campaigners made before the June referendum, namely that leaving the EU would save businesses from EU-related bureaucracy, said the Labour MP Chris Leslie, who backs the group.
“Brexit isn’t a liberation from red tape but the beginning of an avalanche of paperwork for businesses trading with Europe,” he said. “Ministers should commit to publishing a full cost-benefit analysis of the consequences of leaving the customs union, rather than just airily asserting that it will benefit our trade and our economy without any evidence for those claims.”
Jo Carberry, of Open Britain, said leaving the customs union would result in “a bombshell of Brexit bureaucracy for British businesses”.
Meanwhile, membership of the single market, the EU’s wider agreement on free trade as well as the movement of people, services and money, could now be argued in the high court, the Sunday Times has reported.
As the supreme court considers the article 50 legal challenge, a new case hinges on whether the government would have to trigger another legal measure to quit the single market.
Claimants in the new case argue that the government has no mandate to withdraw from the single market because it was not on the ballot paper on 23 June and was not included in the Conservative party manifesto for last year’s general election. They argue that the government would have to trigger article 127 of the European Economic Area agreement.
However, the former attorney general Dominic Grieve – one of Open Britain’s supporters in parliament – cast doubts on the legal basis for the new challenge.
“It’s possible that the argument is that the way we leave the single market has to be separate from leaving the EU itself,” he said, speaking on Sky News’ Murnaghan programme on Sunday. “I have some doubts as to whether that would work.”
Asked if the article 50 challenge was simply “the first legal spanner” in the government’s plans and other legal challenges would follow, Grieve said there was “undoubtedly a very large number of legal complexities”. He added: “It’s going to be complicated; it’s 50 years of enmeshed legal obligations and rights.”
The new case comes after it emerged that another legal challenge to Brexit will go ahead in Ireland after crowdfunding hit a £75,000 target within 48 hours. Specialist tax barrister Jolyon Maugham said he was bringing the case to address two issues: whether a notification under article 50 can be revoked and whether Britain would automatically leave the EEA when it left the EU.
Maugham argues that the European council and the European commission may have breached EU law on the grounds that if article 50 cannot be revoked then the government will be forced to accept whatever Brexit deal the EU offers. As an EU nation needs to be named in the legal action, the case will be heard in Ireland’s high court but is likely to be referred to European courts.
The single market court challenge is being brought by remain voter Peter Wilding, chairman of pressure group British Influence, and Adrian Yalland, a Conservative lobbyist who voted to leave.
They have informed Downing Street of their intention to seek the judicial review. Wilding said: “This is not stopping Brexit, this is shaping it. The country demands a win-win, smart Brexit; not a lose-lose ideological hard Brexit which will damage the UK, damage Europe and for which there is no need and no mandate.”
The supreme court spent four days last week hearing arguments over whether the government’s prerogative powers are sufficient to trigger article 50, or if this needs approval from parliament.
A judgment in the case is expected in early January. The government was granted an early appeal direct to the supreme court after the high court ruled last month that it was up to parliament to launch the formal process of exiting the EU.
That decision prompted much angry comment from some newspapers and Conservative MPs that the courts were trying to overturn the decision of the Brexit referendum in June.
However, those behind the article 50 case insist they are simply seeking to ensure that the process happens in accordance with constitutional protocols.
Helen Mountfield QC, representing the crowdfunded People’s Challenge group at the supreme court, said on Thursday that the government was as good as making up the perceived scope of its prerogative powers as it went along.
“It’s much like attempts to catch the Loch Ness monster,” she said. “Because no one has caught it, it is said to be assumed to still roam free.”
The case was not an attempt to “persuade the court to undertake judicial law-making”, she added.
Edward Snowden has been the subject of several high-profile appeals this year, calling on Barack Obama to pardon the National Security Agency whistleblower and allow him to return home to the US. Writers, intelligence experts, film stars and tech tycoons have all joined the chorus.
Now the most audacious display of support for Snowden is under way. Messages calling for his pardon are being beamed on to the outside wall of the Newseum, the Washington institution devoted to freedom of speech and the press that stands less than two miles from the White House.
The event is a guerrilla action carried out without the knowledge or approval of the Newseum itself, though the organisers of the stunt from the Pardon Snowden campaign are hoping they will be given a sympathetic reception.
“We sincerely hope that the Newseum supports what we are doing as an affirmation of the significance of a free press,” Noa Yachot, the campaign’s director, told the Guardian before the event.
Almost 4,000 messages backing Snowden’s decision to expose mass government surveillance of emails and phone calls have been gathered by the campaign, from across the US and around the world.
The messages include this one, from Casey: “I’m a 69-year-old vet and applaud your guts, we owe you lots and let’s hope you can come home to your family and friends.”
And this, from Tess: “Ed, I’m on your side. You’re a hero and an example of what it means to be an American. Thank you for making such an incredible sacrifice in order that we might move a bit more toward the truth.”
Frank offers: “True patriotism: speaking up when your government loses its moral compass.”
The messages are being projected onto the 74ft-high marble tablet that is attached to the facade of the Newseum and which has the words of the first amendment carved into it.
Written in 1791 as part of the bill of rights, it states: “Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the Government for a redress of grievances.”
Saturday night’s action in Washington comes at a critical time for Snowden, who remains in exile in Russia where he has been granted asylum, having been charged in the US with offences under the Espionage Act.
Obama has less than six weeks left in office, meaning that if he is to use his power to pardon the whistleblower or extend some other form of leniency that would allow him to come home, he has to do so quickly.
Obama’s successor, President-elect Donald Trump, has hinted that he would sooner see Snowden executed than pardoned.
Yachot said the Newseum had been chosen as the location of the guerrilla action as a way of highlighting Snowden’s careful and responsible use of global news organisations as a way of disseminating his leaks.
“Snowden’s work with journalists, including the Guardian, enabled the release of information into the public domain,” she said. “It showed that we need a strong and adversarial media, working with whistleblowers, to inform the public about what the government is doing without anyone’s knowledge.”
Yachot added that though time was running out, history suggested that US presidents often reserved their most contentious pardons until the last minute.
“There are only six weeks left,” she said, “but we know that controversial pardons often come at the end of a president’s term, so we are still hoping.”
Threatening to disclose intimate images would become a criminal offence under amendments to the policing and crime bill to be tabled by the Liberal Democrats.
The clause will also criminalise individuals who disclose revenge porn images in a “reckless” manner, in a bid to prevent perpetrators escaping prosecution because it cannot be proved that the images or video were shared in a malicious way.
The Lib Dem amendments also advocate giving victims of revenge porn the right to anonymity. The move would bring revenge porn – the disclosing of private sexual photographs or video without the consent of the individual and with intent to cause distress – into line with other laws on sexual offences.
Lack of anonymity may act as a disincentive for victims to come forward, as media coverage in court cases can lead to embarrassment or humiliation.
Brian Paddick, Lib Dem shadow home secretary and a former Metropolitan Police senior officer, said: “Revenge porn is a horrific crime that has an appalling impact on victims. Victims should be given anonymity just like all other victims of sexual offences and the threat of disclosing intimate images must also be criminalised, as is the case in Scotland.
“These are commonsense measures that work for victims and will encourage victims to come forward and seek justice. I hope the government and Labour will support us and stand up for those who at the moment are suffering in silence.”
The policing and crime bill is at the report stage and will be debated in the Lords this week. Revenge porn, which carries a jail term of up to two years and a fine, became a criminal offence in England and Wales in April 2015 following a series of high-profile cases that raised awareness of the issue. Prominent victims of revenge porn include Paris Hilton and Tulisa Contostavlos.There were 1,160 cases reported between April and December 2015 to 31 police forces in England and Wales. Three victims were 11 years old. In 61% of cases no action was taken, with lack of evidence or the victim withdrawing support given as the reason
‘I remain extremely concerned about the ongoing detention of Chinese lawyers,’ the US ambassador to China says
Our youth justice system should not just be about punishing crime, important though that is; it should also be about reforming offenders. It should provide discipline, purpose, supervision and someone who cares – elements that have all too often been missing from these young lives.
The people in our prisons and young offender institutions have broken the law, they have violated the rules under which a civilised society necessarily and rightly operates, and they must face the consequences. But we are missing an opportunity if we do not recognise that helping these people to turn their lives around not only benefits them but benefits us all, preventing more of us becoming victims of crime; making streets and communities safer. And delivering huge savings to the public purse.
Nowhere is this opportunity greater than with our young people. Because here the penal system has its earliest chance to intervene, to steer our young people away from a life of crime and on to the right path, towards finding a job, settling down with a family.
Today there are fewer than 1,000 children in custody but this small number represents some of the most complex, violent and damaged children within society. I repeat, they have committed some appalling crimes and it is right that the public are protected and justice is done. However, youth custody should be about more than containment where children are exposed to yet more violence and given little hope that things may ever change.
On average it costs £75,000 a year to keep an offender in a young offender institution yet seven out of 10 will commit another crime within a year of release. Centres that deliver containment without purpose all too often lead to young criminals becoming persistent offenders whose only graduation is into adult prison – young anger that turns into an adult’s hardened attitude to others and leaves a trail of devastated victims in its wake.
This is our chance to equip young offenders with the skills they need to lead law-abiding lives. This is why Charlie Taylor’s groundbreaking new report rightly focuses on putting education at the heart of youth custody. He has made a compelling case for change, and the government has listened. So we will establish two new secure schools – giving children the maths, English and practical skills they need to thrive on the outside.
The progress that young offenders make in education, health and behaviour will be measured to show how well establishments are doing in reforming young offenders. A new role will be created to take charge of youth custody, tasked with reducing violence, driving performance and taking action when necessary if centres are failing.
We will be putting an extra £15m into providing 20% more staff to give the children the supervision and support they need – to challenge them to change and to drive reform. And in time we want to see every young person in custody on an apprenticeship or on the path to further or higher education. Every young person who leaves custody should be earning or learning.
Of course, we need to do more – and we will. Intervening early is crucial in reducing youth crime. However, these longer-term changes we need in our system should not stop us taking the urgent action required to transform youth custody from places where young offenders are left to fester into places of discipline and purpose.
Youth custody represents a crossroads for the young offenders within. They have arrived there through a myriad of missed opportunities, a lack of good guidance and too many bad choices. They may be violent, damaged and challenging but they should not leave without hope that there is another way to lead their lives.
It’s not too late to turn the time spent in custody into a turning point for hundreds of young people.
Liz Truss is lord chancellor and the secretary of state for justice
Serious doubts have been cast over the evidence about the Hillsborough disaster given in a statement by the former Premier League chairman, Sir Dave Richards, which included a notorious allegation against some Liverpool supporters.
Trevor Hicks, whose two teenage daughters, Sarah and Vicki, were among the 96 people unlawfully killed at the 1989 FA Cup semi-final between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest, has called for Richards’s evidence to be investigated by Operation Resolve, the current police investigation into the disaster.
Analysis of Richards’s evidence, together with new research casting doubt on other allegations made against Liverpool supporters by South Yorkshire police, are included in a documentary, Hillsborough: Smears, Survivors and the Search for the Truth, to be shown on ITV on Monday night (10.40pm). Richards was at Hillsborough – Sheffield Wednesday’s home ground – as a spectator and went on to the pitch with a doctor, Christopher Rigby, who tried to save several victims of the lethal crush, including three young men who died.
In his statement, Richards said that they also attended to a woman who died and that some Liverpool supporters made an obscene remark about her. “There were some lads behind the perimeter fence who shouted to us to throw her to them,” his statement said. “They made comments like: ‘Throw her in here, we’ll fucking fix her up.’ There were 10 or 12 of them. I was shocked by this and stood there.”
That alleged episode was similar to another allegation that spectators made a lewd remark about a female victim, which was one of the stories told by South Yorkshire officers that were published in the Sun on 19 April 1989. That edition, which carried the front-page headline “The Truth”, caused great distress to bereaved families and survivors and led to a boycott of the newspaper on Merseyside.
Along with other police allegations of misbehaviour now proved to have been untrue, the Sun reported: “A gang of Liverpool fans noticed that the blouse of a girl trampled to death had risen above her breasts. As a policeman struggled in vain to revive her, the mob jeered: ‘Throw her up here and we will **** her.’ ”
In October 2014 at the new inquests, a former South Yorkshire police inspector, Gordon Sykes, acknowledged that he had been the original source of that story. Michael Mansfield QC, representing 75 families whose relatives died, accused Sykes of having lied and made it up. Sykes maintained that it had happened, then Fiona Barton QC, representing South Yorkshire police, advanced Richards’s statement and read it out in court, as corroboration for the story alleged by Sykes.
Richards, a supporter of Sheffield Wednesday at the time of the disaster, became the club’s chairman soon after and then, in 2000, chairman of the Premier League, a role he held until he stepped down, aged of 70, in 2013.
Analysis of his statement has now revealed discrepancies in the detail with known facts about the disaster. Rigby himself did not say he had attended to any women on the pitch, but Richards gave a detailed description – that the woman was aged between 27 and 30, wearing a short-sleeved blouse and a multicoloured skirt, and that Rigby had told him she was dead.
Seven female victims were among the 96 people who died at Hillsborough and none was wearing a skirt. All were wearing jeans or trousers.
Richards’s statement described Rigby pulling the skirt down and checking for a pulse in the woman’s groin, but Rigby said he checked for a pulse in necks and wrists and it was “unlikely” he would check the groin area. The doctor did not mention hearing any such obscene remark during his and Richards’s time attending to people on the pitch. Richards was never called as a witness to the inquests and he has not responded either to ITV’s or the Observer’s questions about these discrepancies.
Doubt has also been cast on the evidence of another witness to the alleged obscene remark, who claimed to have been told of it by other Liverpool supporters. The witness, Cherry Daniels, told this story to West Midlands police, who were appointed to investigate the disaster in 1989, but her statement did not disclose that she was in fact the daughter of a South Yorkshire police officer, Chief Inspector David Sumner, who was Sykes’s superior in the force.
Daniels did not respond to the Observer’s questions about this but did reply to ITV. She said that she did tell West Midlands police at the time, and the Independent Police Complaints Commission in 2014, that she was Sumner’s daughter, but these investigators had said it was not relevant and not included it in her statement. The IPCC has told the Observer, however, that it has found no evidence that Daniels disclosed she was Sumner’s daughter.
The statement of another witness, Anthony Garratty, a steward at Hillsborough who attended to many people who died or were injured, also included that he overheard a lewd remark from Liverpool supporters. Interviewed for the documentary, Garratty said that he never related such a story and believed West Midlands police officers must have inserted it. The IPCC has said that it is investigating similar allegations by survivors of the disaster, that West Midlands police officers altered their statements, failed to reflect what they had said, or put improper pressure on them.
These witnesses now include Ray Lewis, who was the referee for the semi-final, which he abandoned at 3.06pm when he was alerted to the crisis in the Leppings Lane end. Lewis’s handwritten statement includes the observation that: “I saw some spectators walking in good humour. They were mixed.” In the typed version, which Lewis said he did not see until the current IPCC investigation 25 years later, the word “mixed” is changed, and the sentence reads: “They were pissed.” Lewis has told the programme that he believes this was clearly changed by West Midlands police and should be investigated. The West Midlands force is not commenting on any detail while investigations continue.
The programme also casts doubt on another story told against Liverpool supporters, which was included as an accepted fact by Lord Justice Taylor in his August 1989 report into the cause of the disaster: that a police horse was burned by cigarettes. A South Yorkshire police constable, David Scott, faced no disciplinary action for striking out at Liverpool supporters caught in the crush outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles, partly because it was accepted that his horse had been burned with a cigarette. One of the UK’s most senior veterinary consultants, Prof Derek Knottenbelt, of the Equine Hospital at the University of Liverpool, has viewed the footage of Scott on his horse and concluded from the horse’s lack of severe reaction that it cannot have been burned in the manner described. Although Scott said he had informed his senior officer, Insp Paul Hand-Davies, in fact Hand-Davies never mentioned a horse being burned and told South Yorkshire police’s own press office at the time that it had not happened.
Scott declined to answer questions from the Observer.
The bereaved families and survivors argued that stories of drunkenness, obscenity and other alleged misbehaviour by supporters at the match were smears put out by South Yorkshire police to avoid responsibility for their failings which caused the lethal crush, and shift blame on to the victims. The jury at the new inquests determined in April this year that the 96 people were unlawfully killed due to gross negligence by the South Yorkshire police officer in command, Chief Superintendent David Duckenfield, that there were several other serious police failings,and that no behaviour by supporters contributed to the dangerous situation.
Hicks told the Observer: “I believe that the reliability of Sir Dave Richards’s evidence about this alleged incident should now be investigated by Operation Resolve. The smears found their way into the Sun so that the police could deflect responsibility and blame innocent supporters and Richards’s evidence was advanced at the inquests to support one of those stories.”
Some research for the ITV programme was originally carried out by people who as teenagers survived the crush at Hillsborough and are now applying professional skills in the search for the truth.
The first time I had to leave Bahrain, I was given 24 hours to do so and told not to tell anyone. My father had been informed that my name was coming up during interrogations of political detainees, and that is usually a sign that arrest will follow. 
I left for London in September 2010 with a heavy heart, determined to return. And so, after the Arab Spring uprisings in the Middle East began, I was active in calling for protests in Bahrain, and I returned home to take part in them.
The second time I left Bahrain, my father had convinced me that it was critical to have someone carry the voices of the movement outside the country. I felt the weight of the entire uprising on my shoulders. I thought my exile was temporary; I had no idea that it would not be.
Being an activist in exile involves many levels of struggle. First and foremost is the struggle of being on your own. Especially for those who have been working on the ground. You have suddenly lost your family, your community, and all your support. Hardship is easier to endure when you are going through it with others. 
This solitude tends to be accompanied by survivor’s guilt. Most activists who survive when others do not, who avoid prison while others are incarcerated, and who can move freely when others cannot know this feeling very well. You feel guilty all the time, and that guilt drives your everyday life. It leaves you unable to take a break or a vacation, because what about the responsibility to all those who did not make it while you did? The feeling of guilt becomes a constant: the message of a friend you didn’t answer who got arrested, the friend request that you never accepted from someone who was then killed. The list goes on. 
When working as an activist in exile it’s important to come to terms with both your strengths and weaknesses. The first step is to confront the fact that you are now in exile, and that you have to re-adjust and re-strategise regarding the role you can play for your cause. For many activists, being successful in their work isn’t only about self-satisfaction – it is what allows them to justify their exile to themselves and not lose hope. One of the most important first steps is to map out and identify all your allies and supporters. Your ability to influence change increases with your network.
One of the greatest problems I discovered is that the feeling of helplessness is worse than the feeling of fear. I’m not talking about just any fear, but the fear of being chased by police and seeing tear gas canisters and rubber bullets fly by your head, knowing you might not be going home that night. The feeling of being in exile – of knowing that a loved one might be tortured right at that moment, and knowing that you cannot do anything to stop it from happening – that’s helplessness.
There is also the need to understand that being on the outside means you cannot speak for those on the inside. I like to regard my activism in exile as being more in the form of a loudspeaker: my job is to make sure that people in Bahrain continue to be heard no matter how creative the regime is in trying to silence them. The most important factor is to remain connected – although this comes with its own problems.
The internet means that despite being thousands of miles away I get real-time updates on everything that is happening on the ground in my country. This allows me to remain connected, to be aware of what is happening, and to react when necessary. But this also causes me to feel overwhelmed. There is a constant need to be connected, and I feel an anxiety about losing that connection. It almost becomes as if you are living in two worlds at the same time – and those worlds rarely meet.
The biggest obstacle here is the surveillance and security risks that the internet carries. Connecting with people on the ground may mean placing them in danger, and you must be on high alert and diligent at all times regarding the digital security precautions you take. Activists living abroad tend to become more relaxed about surveillance and digital security because of the unaccustomed feeling of safety. With digital security, however, all those connected are only as secure as their weakest links, and activists in exile have to actively remind themselves about the risks faced by those they communicate with. That is why creating strict rules for oneself as an activist in exile becomes crucial.
One of the first rules I made for myself after I had to leave Bahrain was to never call on people there to do something I would not do myself. I’ll share calls for protests, but I will never call for people to go unless I can be with them. This derives from the ethical position of not asking people to sacrifice themselves when you’re not doing so yourself.
To most activists, exile is and will always be temporary – at least that’s what they believe. The plan to go back is always present, always in the back of their minds. On the other hand, there is also so much to be learned about the importance of the role of activists in exile from other struggles.
A case in point would be the struggle against apartheid in South Africa. The international movement played a critical role in bringing an end to the apartheid system. While the grassroots, local struggle is the essence of the movement, those in exile complement and build on that.
There is a reason why dictators try to isolate movements within their borders from the rest of the world; and why, on the other hand, civil society does its best to go beyond borders and connect to people on an international platform. There is strength in unity and collectivity.
What it comes down to is this: can I make more of a difference working in exile, or sitting in a prison cell in Bahrain?
This article is part of a series promoted by the Open Society Foundations to mark Human Rights Day (December 10) and to focus attention on how human rights defenders worldwide are adapting to a growing list of antagonists, including governments, corporate actors, paramilitary groups, and organized crime.
It is only five years since the then foreign secretary William Hague declared that there would be “no downgrading of human rights under this government”. Pursuing a foreign policy with a conscience was, he argued, in our “long-term enlightened national interest”.
Yet as we mark International Human Rights Day it is striking how far the Tories have strayed from this commitment, not least as their emphasis on “commercial diplomacy” has grown. Human rights concerns are now of secondary importance to trade.
Last year George Osborne’s visit to China earned praise from his host nation’s state-run media, saying he was “the first western official in recent years who has stressed more the region’s business potential instead of finding fault over the human rights issue”.
As Simon McDonald, the head of the diplomatic service, told MPs two weeks ago: “Clearly more resource is devoted … to prosperity than to human rights.” He explained that although human rights is “one of the things we follow, it is not one of our top priorities”.
That much is increasingly clear from the government’s approach to a number of international relationships, from China and Turkey to Egypt and the Gulf states. On visiting the Gulf Cooperation Council this week, the prime minister promised “a new chapter” in the UK’s ties with the region. Indeed, this was the first time a British prime minister has attended the council. Of the UK’s relationships with Bahrain and Saudi Arabia, she said: “In recent years our relationship hasn’t felt as close as it is old. I want to change that.” This is despite the desperately poor human rights records of both countries.
In Bahrain, we know that disproportionate, often lethal, force is used to suppress civilian protests, and torture is rife in prisons, and yet the UK is continuing to train the very security forces and prison services accused of these crimes.
In Saudi Arabia, whether it was the UK’s proposed prison training contract – cancelled only after overwhelming pressure – or the timid Foreign Office response to the mass executions carried out in the kingdom in January, the Tory government treats Riyadh’s human rights record as an inconvenient embarrassment, rather than a cause of serious concern.
Take the conflict in Yemen, where thousands of civilians have died – the large majority as a result of Saudi airstrikes. The same air campaign has crippled the country’s agricultural infrastructure, for no acceptable military purpose. And the humanitarian crisis created by the conflict is increasingly desperate, with millions now facing famine.
All this, and yet the UK government continues to arm and advise the Saudi-led coalition prosecuting this conflict, and has angrily rebuffed Labour’s calls for that support to be suspended until alleged Saudi violations of international humanitarian law have been properly and independently investigated.
If this were just evidence of a government with its head in the sand on human rights, that would be bad enough.
But Boris Johnson’s remarks in Rome, revealed by the Guardian this week, indicate something far worse. The foreign secretary is all too aware that Saudi Arabia and other countries are fighting proxy wars in the Middle East, with millions of civilians trapped in the crossfire, and yet he continues to sell Riyadh the arms to wage those wars. It is hypocrisy of the highest order.
And fresh from his latest slapping-down by Theresa May, he will spend today – International Human Rights Day – not raising these concerns openly and forcibly with our Saudi allies, but preparing to fly out to Riyadh and clarify his remarks.
Of course the government asserts that difficult discussions about human rights do take place – but behind the scenes. Does it make any difference? Not on the evidence provided.
Furthermore, while private talks are of course important, this should never be at the expense of speaking up and applying pressure when it is right and necessary to do so. By creating a perception that the UK places a higher premium on striking commercial deals than it does on promoting and protecting human rights, our reputation in the world suffers.
With Brexit on the horizon and an isolationist president moving into the White House, we are having to redefine our place in the world and the influence we wield, more so than at any other time since the end of empire. To that end Theresa May eagerly talks up the idea of a “truly global Britain”. Yet it cannot just be one that promotes our trade and security interests; it must also promote our nation’s values – whether in respect of human rights, the rule of law, or the protection of the environment.
Prosperity need not come at the expense of this country’s proudest traditions as a beacon of justice. Reluctance to fully champion these values not only runs counter to who we are as a country, it also risks eroding our international standing just when we need it most.
A grandfather has called on parliament to legislate in favour of assisted dying before ending his own life at Dignitas.
Andrew Barclay, 65, died on Thursday after taking a lethal dose of drugs in an apartment near Zurich, having travelled to Switzerland with his wife. He had advanced multiple sclerosis.
Speaking to the Daily Mirror, the former civil servant, from Folkestone, Kent, said he was concerned that his partner, Sandra, 67, may face a police investigation on her return to Britain for helping him fulfil his wish.
“We need a law that makes it a feasible option in Britain,” he said. “It needs to be tightly regulated but why not draw the line where Dignitas has?
“It’s not easy to go there, you need medical and psychiatric reports and you need to carry out the final act yourself.”
Barclay said it had cost more than £10,000 and taken 14 months of “fighting” to die at Dignitas. He was diagnosed with MS in 1992 and endured the neurological disease though stages of remission and relapse, at times being unable to get out of bed or swallow.
In 2013 he was told his condition had entered a secondary progressive stage that meant his symptoms would not improve. He used a wheelchair for three years and was devastated that he was unable to lift up his two granddaughters, aged two and four.
His struggle with immobility, incontinence and partial blindness meant his mood was unpredictable and he was often depressed.
He said: “There are still genuine moments of happiness. But they no longer outweigh a life in which every single day is a struggle from start to end. So I have made this decision.”
Sandra Barclay said she was heartbroken, but added: “If you love someone you don’t want to see them suffer.”
Under the Suicide Act 1961, anyone helping or encouraging someone to take their own life can be prosecuted and jailed for up to 14 years.
In 2015 MPs including David Cameron rejected a bill to legalise assisted dying, but a second bill was raised in the House of Lords in June.
Opposition to changing the law has come from faith groups, campaigners who say disabled people may feel pressured to end their lives, and campaigners who fear assisted dying would become a business.
Sarah Wootton, chief executive of the pro-assisted dying group Dignity in Dying, told the newspaper: “It is a tragic and unacceptable reality that seriously ill people like Andrew feel they have no other choice but to spend their final days travelling hundreds of miles to Switzerland in order to have the dignified death they desire.”
I have always considered “tolerance” a highly problematic concept: it is today considered to describe a positive attribute, when in fact it refers to a rather negative one. This ambivalence was succinctly put by Goethe, who, in one of his Maxims and Reflections, stated: “Tolerance should really only be a passing attitude: it should lead to appreciation. To tolerate is to offend.”
Merely tolerating someone is ultimately an act of condescension, whereas actual appreciation results in seeing the other as one’s equal. “Diversity”, in turn, is an extension of the principle of appreciation in that it signifies the achievement of equality of opportunity for social, cultural, ethnic, religious or other groups that would otherwise be subject to discrimination.
Both concepts could not be more topical in our globalised world, in which states and societies are faced with increasing permeability and fluidity, and the resulting challenges lead to a host of debates and conflicts. It is in this constantly shifting climate of insecurity that states and societies have to deal with the enormous challenge of unprecedented levels of global migration.
Precise terminology is important here. Take the usage of the terms “global” and “universal”: while they can often have the same meaning, “universal” has a distinctive additional meaning that is time- and place-independent and categorical: there is a reason we call it the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and not the Global Declaration of Human Rights.
It is specifically in the context of immigration that we must reassess and reaffirm our notions of “tolerance” and “diversity”. The philosopher Martin Buber explored the principle of dialogue as a basis of human relations in his seminal work, I and Thou. According to Buber, human beings form their identities chiefly in relation to what surrounds them – other humans and the physical world. Thus, any social construct – be it in a society or between nation states – necessitates dialogue and exchange. Understanding the other – or in Buber’s words, for every “I” to seek reciprocal understanding of the “You” – is therefore the very foundation of humanity.
We need to see the other as our equal and fully accept him or her despite perceived weaknesses or differences. This is the real intellectual basis of improving relationships between human beings. It is on this basis too that we can embrace our responsibility of protecting each other’s human rights.
With every right we enjoy, there is, however, a set of responsibilities linked to it. The German government has taken on an admirable leadership role in dealing with what has widely been called the “refugee crisis”, yet it is clear this is a universal issue. As is the seemingly unsolvable Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which is not a conflict between two nations but between two peoples who have opposite narrations.
Without ever claiming that we can bring about real peace or equality in the world and the Middle East in particular, the West-Eastern Divan Orchestra (named after a collection of Goethe’s poetry) and I have nonetheless striven tirelessly to lead by example. Today’s concert in Geneva to mark Human Rights Day is no exception. In our orchestra, diversity is lived on a daily basis and no single musician can exist without a fundamental understanding and appreciation of the other, however different he or she may be.
The sovereign independent republic of the West-Eastern Divan, as I like to call it, began as an unpredictable experiment in 1999. Over the years, it has grown into an example of how society could function under the best of circumstances. Our musicians have gone through the painful process of learning to express themselves while simultaneously listening to the narrative of their counterparts. I cannot imagine a better way of implementing the first and most fundamental article of the UN Declaration of Human Rights: that all human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights, that they are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.
From the outset, our approach in the orchestra’s workshops and seminars has been to focus on understanding what it means to listen to each other – both as musicians and as human beings. Learning to listen in that way sensitises us both for ourselves and the world around us.
Music, of course, makes this possible because it allows us to think, feel and express different thoughts and emotions simultaneously. Music never only cries or smiles but makes both possible at once. It is a constant, simultaneous conversation between apparent opposites that can peacefully exist side by side. This should be the spirit we carry forward.
• Daniel Barenboim and the West-Eastern Divan Orchestra give a concert dedicated to human rights today, 10 December, in Geneva
More than half a dozen political prisoners in China should freed, the United States and European Union have said, citing a deteriorating human rights situation that has seen hundreds lawyers and activists detained in the past year.
Since coming to power in 2012 the Chinese president, Xi Jinping, has presided over a wide-ranging crackdown on freedom of expression, rights lawyers, feminists, activists and religion. About 250 lawyers and activists were detained by police starting in July last year in what some have called a “war on law”.
“I remain extremely concerned about the ongoing detention of Chinese lawyers,” Max Baucus, the US ambassador to China, said in a statement. “China’s treatment of these lawyers and advocates calls into question its commitment to the rule of law.”
Crusading attorneys Li Heping, Wang Quanzhang, Xie Yang and Xie Yanyi all remain behind bars, and Baucus singled out their cases and called for their release. The EU echoed many of the same sentiments and highlighted the same jailed lawyers.
“We urge China to immediately release any individual who has been detained … for seeking to exercise, protect or promote their own rights or the rights of others,” the EU statement said.
The US and EU made the calls to mark Human Rights Day, a United Nations holiday commemorating the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which China signed.
“During the past year, we have been extremely troubled about the deterioration of the situation with respect to freedom of expression and association,” the EU statement said.
“We are equally concerned about all human rights defenders and their family members who have been harassed and punished because of their work in promoting rights which are protected in China’s Constitution and international law.”
Both the US and EU called for Nobel Peace prize laureate and democracy activist Liu Xiaobo, who has been in prison since 2008, to be freed.
Tashi Wangchuk, a jailed Tibetan language advocate, was also mentioned by both governments. His case is emblematic of the hardline stance China has taken towards ethnic minorities who do not toe the Communist party line. Another victim of those policies is Ilham Tohti, a Muslim Uighur academic sentenced to life in prison, who the EU said should be released.
“I can tell you that China’s approach to human rights directly impacts our overall bilateral relationship,” Baucus said. “While other countries celebrate when their citizens win the Nobel Peace prize, Chinese Peace prize winner Liu Xiaobo remains jailed.”
The strongly-worded statement on human rights from the US may be its last for a while, Chinese activists worry. They fear president-elect Donald Trump will pull back from defending right around the world.
Curiously absent from the EU statement was Gui Minhai, a Swedish national and publisher of books critical of China’s leaders, who was allegedly abducted from Thailand a year ago. He later appeared in China, giving a televised “confession”.
More than 120 authors also took the opportunity of Human Rights Day to call on Xi to his end his government’s fierce crackdown on writers and dissidents, with the authors saying they “cannot stand by as more and more of our friends and colleagues are silenced”.
Today, on World Human Rights Day, our Pen International community of writers, readers, activists and publishers condemn the Chinese authorities’ sustained and increasing attack on free expression and call for an immediate end to China’s worsening crackdown on fundamental human rights.
We cannot stand by as more and more of our friends and colleagues are silenced. Where is the voice of Ilham Tohti, the Uighur scholar and Pen member currently serving a life sentence, when his life’s work has been about creating peace and dialogue in China? Where is the voice of veteran journalist Gao Yu, who spent close to two years in prison and is now under house arrest? Where is the voice of publisher Gui Minhai, who disappeared from his holiday home in Thailand and is now being held incommunicado? Where is the voice of Nobel peace laureate and former president of the Independent Chinese Pen Centre, Liu Xiaobo, serving an 11-year prison sentence and the voice of his wife, the poet Liu Xia, who has been under house arrest for over six years without even having been accused of a crime?
These writers represent the many critical voices across China currently being silenced, including the imprisoned and persecuted members of the Independent Chinese Pen Centre: Yang Tongyan, Zhu Yufu, Lü Gengsong, Chen Shuqing, Hu Shigen, Qin Yongmin, Liu Yanli and Liu Feiyue; and honorary members Zhang Haitao, Sun Feng, Lu Yuyu, Li Tingyu, Huang Qi and Su Changlan. The enforced silence of these friends and colleagues is deafening, and the disappearance of their voices has left a world worse off for this egregious injustice and loss.
Today we call for their words to reverberate across the globe as we commit to fighting for their freedom until China heeds our call. On days like today we have to reaffirm our refusal not to be complicit in their silence. We have to use our own words to give power to theirs.
China and the rest of the world can only be enriched by these opinions and voices. We therefore urge the Chinese authorities to release the writers, journalists and activists who are languishing in jail or kept under house arrest for the crime of speaking freely and expressing their opinions.
We urge them to uphold freedom of expression and all human rights.
Abraham Zere Pen Eritrea
William Nygaard Pen Norway
Adriaan van Dis
Ah Phyu Yaung Shwe
Aleid Truijens
Alejandro Sánchez-Aizcorbe Peruvian Pen
Alexander McCall Smith Pen Writers Circle
Anders Heger Pen International
Andrew Solomon Pen America
Anna Nasiłowska Polish Pen
Annika Thor Swedish Pen
Anotnio Della Rocca Pen Trieste 
Baoqiang Sun
Burhan Sönmez Pen Writers Circle 
Carles Torner Pen International 
Carme Arenas Pen Catala 
Catherine Vuylsteke 
Chaw Ei Mahn 
Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie    
Chit Kyi Aye 
Christine Otten 
Chu Cai 
Colm Toibin Pen Writers Circle 
De Novo 
Depu He 
Dr Mirror (Taung-gyi) 
Elif Shafak Pen Writers Circle 
Eugene Schoulgin Pen International 
Feng Hu 
Fiona Graham Scottish Pen 
Frank Mackay Anim-Appiah Pen Ghana 
Ghareeb Asqalani 
Gloria Guardia Pen International 
Go Go Mawlamyaing 
Guozhen Xiao 
Hakan Günday Pen Writers Circle
Han Zaw 
Hanan Al Shaykh Pen Writers Circle 
Hanan Awwad Pen Palestine 
Htar Oak Thon 
Iman Humaydan Pen Lebanon 
Isabel Allende Pen Writers Circle        
Jennifer Clement Pen International 
Jianguo Zha 
Jianhong Li 
Jianhua Li 
Jianzhen Qi 
Jiro Asada Japan Pen 
JM Coetzee 
Joanne Leedom-Ackermon Pen International
Judyth Hill Pen San Miguel 
July Moe 
Juraj Šebesta Slovak Pen 
Khin Aung Aye 
Khin Mg Oo 
Khin Moe Shwe 
Khin Mya Zin 
