Blind date: ‘I wish it had been on a Friday: I’d have liked more cocktails’
Christmas music is inescapable this time of year, making it impossible to hold a neutral opinion about the genre. But what causes people to fall into one camp or the other?
Here, two writers flesh out the very personal reasons that the same annual din makes one desolate and the other merry.
I hate Christmas music in public. In New York, I can’t go to the deli to get a soda, drink a cup of coffee in a diner, buy a pack of condoms in a drugstore, hear a radio station in the dentist’s office or even walk down the street without being bombarded with a stream of insipid bromides and jingles about how happy I should be.
My reasons for hating unsolicited Christmas music are pretty personal. The holiday has stopped being enjoyable since my dad, mom and stepmother all died in my twenties; indeed, the whole season has become unbearable since one of my sisters died halfway through my thirties. Already blue in my thoughts from Thanksgiving to New Year’s, Christmas music invades my melancholy and makes it worse, forcing me to think about happy Christmases past never to be repeated, and to feel like a failure as a single adult without children.
I know I’m not alone in these thoughts, though. Who among us wants to hear reminders of the good time you’re supposed to be having at home, at work, in the store and on the radio, every incessant second?
As a Christian, I usually celebrate the holiday in some form. I’ve sung in many gospel choir concerts and know most of the Christmas standards by heart. I’ve hosted many a party where I’ve donned a Santa hat and played Christmas songs all night long. But I can turn this music on or off. When I am walking down the street or want to buy a toothbrush, I don’t want to be forced repeatedly to pine for a reality, a family or a set of experiences which are not available to me — and which should not be foisted on anyone.
What I resent most about Christmas music is that it’s used as a blatant tool of social control to make us long for families that may be broken or deceased, and to desire consumer goods we don’t want and can’t afford. It’s also theocratic, and its omnipresence in the commons disrespects people who aren’t Christians. It even robs Christians of the chance to appreciate Christmas music as something special, and of the chance to just be with the quiet of the season.
The trick to liking Christmas music is finding the right Christmas music to like.
Obvious, yes, but not so easy to do, given the amount of garbage there is to sift through. Starting around Halloween, that’s all that plays in continuous rotation at the mall, Starbucks, Bill O’Reilly’s dressing room, even the quick-change oil place down the street, for some reason. It’s inescapable. It’s no wonder people hate Christmas music.
But just as the spirit of Christmas exists apart from the annual orgy of consumerism that overtakes us like a bloodlust, the spirit of Christmas music isn’t to be found in yet another version of Winter Wonderland or the kind-of-rape-y Baby, It’s Cold Outside.
There’s plenty to love about Christmas music that doesn’t involve hoary standards worn thinner than Grandpa’s holiday tie, though even standards done well have a certain charm: Emmylou Harris singing The First Noel is spellbinding no matter how many times I hear it, and Paul Westerberg’s ramshackle version of Away in a Manger is perfect in its half-assed glory.
Apart from those, the Christmas songs I love fall into two categories. First, subversive novelty tunes that spoof the ridiculous parts of the holiday season: Monty Python’s Christmas in Heaven, or Nick Lowe’s Christmas at the Airport, or Big Freedia’s over-the-top new Christmas jam Make It Jingle, a paean to ostentatious gifts and lewd dance moves. Come to think of it, that one’s probably not satirical, but it’s fun in a way that Santa Baby hasn’t been since 1953.
Then there are the poignant, heart-on-sleeve songs, because who doesn’t like to wallow a bit every now and then? The Pogues’ Fairytale of New York, Jesse Malin’s Xmas and John Prine’s Christmas in Prison, to name a few, see past the tinsel and lights to the bittersweet side of the Christmas season. Tidings of joy are often undercut by darker themes: financial instability, hunger, more keenly missing absent loved ones. The sad-bastard songs remind me to be grateful for my own good fortune.
Christmas music also reminds me of my mom, who died two days before Christmas in 2002. She loved the holiday season, and I can’t remember a year when Harris’ Light of the Stable album wasn’t playing while she baked cookies and we decorated the tree. Even in leaner years, she never let on to us kids, or let it dim her enthusiasm. And she would have loved that Nick Lowe song.
Time is a boomerang, not an arrow. I was adopted by Pentecostals and stamped “Missionary”. Christmas was important in the missionary calendar. From the beginning of November, either we were preparing packages to send to the Foreign Field or we were preparing packages to deliver to those in Hot Places returning to the Home Front.
It might have been because my parents had been in the second world war. It might have been because we lived in End Time, waiting for Armageddon. Whatever the reason, there was a drill to Christmas, from making the mincemeat for the mince pies to singing carols to, or rather at, the unsaved of Accrington. Still, Mrs Winterson loved Christmas. It was the one time of the year when she went out into the world looking as though the world was more than a vale of tears.
She was an unhappy woman, and so this happy time in our house was precious. I am sure I love Christmas because she did.
On 21 December every year, my mother went out in her hat and coat while my father and I strung up the paper chains, made by me, from the corners of the parlour cornice to the centre light fitting.
Eventually my mother returned, in what seemed to be a hailstorm, though maybe that was her personal weather. She carried a goose, half-in, half-out of her shopping bag, its slack head hung sideways like a dream nobody can remember. She passed it to me – goose and dream – and I plucked the feathers into a bucket. We kept the feathers to restuff whatever needed restuffing, and we saved the thick goose fat drained from the bird for roasting potatoes through the winter. Apart from Mrs W, who had a thyroid problem, everyone we knew was as thin as a ferret. We needed goose fat.
After I had left home, and later gone to university at Oxford, I went back to the old house, that first Christmas-time. My mother had given me the ultimatum to leave home long since, when I fell in love with a girl, and in a religious house like ours I might as well have married a goat. We hadn’t spoken since. I had lived in a Mini for a bit, lodged with a teacher and eventually left town. During my first term at Oxford I received a postcard – one of those postcards that says post card in blue letters at the top. Underneath, in her immaculate copperplate handwriting was the message: “Are you coming home this Christmas? Love Mother”.
As I reached our little terrace house at the top of the street, I could hear the mostly musical sounds of what is best described as a bossa nova version of “In the Bleak Midwinter”. My mother had thrown out the old upright piano and got herself an electronic organ with double keyboard, orchestra stops, drum and bass.
She hadn’t seen me for two years. Nothing was said. We spent the next hour admiring the effects of snare drum and trumpet solo on “Hark! The Herald Angels Sing”.
My Oxford friend from St Lucia was due to visit me at home, which was brave of her, but when I had tried to explain about my family she thought I was exaggerating. At first the visit was a great success. Mrs W considered a black friend as a missionary endeavour all of its own. She went round to the retired missionaries from the church and asked: “What do they eat?” Pineapples, came the answer.
When Vicky arrived my mother gave her a wool blanket she had knitted so that Vicky would not be cold. “They feel the cold,” she told me.
Mrs Winterson was an obsessive and she had been knitting for Jesus all year. The Christmas tree had knitted decorations on it, and the dog was imprisoned inside a Christmas coat of red wool with white snowflakes. There was a knitted nativity scene, and the shepherds were wearing little scarves because this was Bethlehem on the bus route to Accrington.
My dad opened the door dressed in a knitted waistcoat and matching knitted tie. The whole house had been re-knitted.
Mrs W was in a merry mood. “Would you like some gammon and pineapple, Vicky? Cheese on toast with pineapple? Pineapples and cream? Pineapple upside-down cake? Pineapple fritters?” Eventually, after a few days of this fare, Vicky said: “I don’t like pineapple.”
Mrs W’s mood changed at once. She didn’t speak to us for the rest of the day and she crushed up a papier-mache robin. The next morning, at breakfast, the table was set with a pyramid of unopened tins of pineapple chunks and a Victorian postcard of two cats on their hind legs dressed up like Mr and Mrs. The caption said “Nobody loves us”.
That night, when Vicky went to bed, she found that her pillow had been removed and the pillowcase stuffed with warning leaflets about the Apocalypse. She wondered whether to go home, but I’d seen worse and I thought things might improve.
On Christmas Eve we had a group of carol singers round from the church. Mrs W did seem happier. She had forced me and Vicky to wrap several half-cabbages in tinfoil and spear them with cocktail sticks of cheddar cheese, topped with the rejected pineapple chunks.
She called these things sputniks. It was something to do with the cold war. Tinfoil? Antennae? The scaremongering that the KGB had listening devices hidden in cheese?
Never mind. The offending pineapples had found a purpose and we were all singing carols quite happily when there was a knock at the door. It turned out to be the Salvation Army, singing carols too.
This was reasonable. It was Christmas. But Mrs Winterson was having none of it. She opened the front door and shouted: “Jesus is here. Go away.”
When I went away after that Christmas I never went back. I never saw Mrs W again – she was soon too furious about my debut novel, Oranges Are Not the Only Fruit (1985). Quote: “It’s the first time I’ve had to order a book in a false name.”
As you get older you remember the dead at Christmas. The Celts, during their festival of Samhain, expected the dead to join the living. Many cultures would understand that; not ours.
That is a pity. And a loss. If time is a boomerang and not an arrow, then the past is always returning and repeating. Memory, as a creative act, allows us to reawaken the dead, or sometimes to lay them to rest, as at last we understand our past.
Last Christmas I was alone in my kitchen, the fire lit – I love having a fire in the kitchen. I was pouring myself a drink when Judy Garland came on the radio singing “Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas”. I remembered how Mrs W had played that song on the piano. It was one of those moments we all know, of sadness and sweetness mixed together. Regret? Yes, I think so, for everything we got wrong. But recognition too, because she was a remarkable woman. She deserved a miracle to get her out of her trapped life of no hope, no money, no possibility of change.
Fortunately, she got the miracle. Unfortunately, the miracle was me. I was the golden ticket. I could have taken her anywhere. She could have been free ...
The Christmas story of the Christ Child is complex. Here’s what it tell us about miracles.
Miracles are never convenient (the baby’s going to be born whether or not there’s a hotel room – and there isn’t).
Miracles are not what we expect (an obscure man and woman find themselves parenting the Saviour of the World).
Miracles detonate the existing situation – and the blow-up and the back-blast mean some people get hurt.
What is a miracle? A miracle is an intervention – it breaks through the space-time continuum. A miracle is an intervention that cannot be accounted for purely rationally. Chance and fate are in the mix. A miracle is a benign intervention, yes, but miracles are like the genie in the bottle – let them out and there’s a riot. You’ll get your three wishes, but a whole lot else besides.
Mrs W wanted a baby. She couldn’t have one. Along comes me – but as she often said, “The Devil led us to the wrong crib.” Satan as a faulty star.
Sometimes the thing we long for, the thing we need, the miracle we want, is right there in front of us, and we can’t see it, or we run the other way; or, saddest of all, we just don’t know what to do with it. Think how many people get the success they want, the partner they want, the money they want, and turn it into dust and ashes – like the fairy gold no one can spend.
So at this time of year I think about the Christmas story, and all the Christmas stories since. As a writer I know that we get along badly without space in our lives for imagination and reflection. Religious festivals were designed to be time outside of time. Time where ordinary time was subject to significant time. What we remember. What we invent.
• Christmas Days: 12 Stories and 12 Feasts for 12 Days by Jeanette Winterson is published by Jonathan Cape. To order a copy for £11.25 (RRP £14.99) go to bookshop.theguardian.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.
The sights and sounds of Christmas in the capital reflect the place itself - an extraordinary montage of tradition and change, glamour, pathos, enterprise, curiosity, possibility, poignance and generosity. I asked student film maker Max Curwen-Bingley to collect some seasonal scenes from the city, concentrating on variety and musicality. Here’s what he found.
From Good King Wenceslas on Oxford Street to Oh Come All Ye Faithful in Trafalgar Square, with room for reggae at Oxford Circus too. That’s the spirit. Merry Christmas from London to readers everywhere.
After Helen Pidd and Yasser, her Syrian lodger, wrote about their house-share in January, they were inundated with offers of help, dinner invitations and football tickets. Readers asked how they, too, could host a refugee: an 89-year-old retired academic put up a friend of Yasser’s.
Burnage Academy, a boys’ school in south Manchester, invited Helen and Yasser to talk to their new-to-English students, then offered Yasser the opportunity to volunteer as a classroom assistant. Able, a private language school, gave him 10 hours a week free English tuition for as long as he wants it; Empowering Learning, a teacher-training consultancy in London, offered to sponsor Yasser through his teaching qualifications, so he could pick up the career he had so loved back home in Syria.
Yasser moved out in April, when his wife and toddler daughter arrived. They are now happily settled in north Manchester. He has a job stewarding for Manchester United and at Chester Races, and recently passed his driving test. After he left, Helen took in another refugee, a female academic from Damascus. She left in August and Helen is enjoying an empty house – for now.
In January, Duncan Campbell told the astonishing inside story of the £14m Hatton Garden jewellery heist. Readers commented that the article read like the plot of a thriller, and indeed it was optioned by Working Title Films. Filming plans are now under way, with James Marsh (The Theory Of Everything, Man On Wire) directing and Joe Penhall writing.
Mark Smith, a former soldier turned disabled bodybuilder, told Chris Stokel-Walker in January why he was planning to compete alongside able-bodied men in international contests. But a taster session for strongman training, where participants test their strength in challenges with extremely heavy weights, made him want to pursue that instead. In May, Smith won a national strongman contest; in August, he came sixth in the World’s Strongest Disabled Man competition. Next year, he’s aiming to win.
In February, Louise Tickle reported on one woman’s fight to get her baby son Huw returned from North Tyneside social services. Though her relationship with her own local authority is now, she says, “extremely tense”, “Annie” is in huge demand as a speaker by children’s services and university social work departments. She recently came off benefits to set up her own Surviving Safeguarding training and consultancy business, as well as an organisation to support parents in the care system. Her son, now three, is thriving in her care; her daughter Rosie, eight, has come home to live with Annie full-time.
At the end of October, Billy Muir – farmer, lighthouse keeper, firefighter, rare-breeds expert, air traffic controller, conservator, mechanic, binman, local councillor, builder, crofting commissioner, taxi driver, hotelier and unofficial president of the JCB fan club in Orkney, whom Bella Bathurst profiled in February, won a Pride of Britain award and met Theresa May at Downing Street. Still working at 67, Muir isn’t, he confessed, doing much to help lower the national retirement age. And nor will he for some time to come: his next goal is to buy a new digger.
When Myles and Erin Elton spoke to Kate Lyons in March for a story about male infertility, they had been trying to conceive their third child for nine months. Myles, 28, had been told at the age of 21 that, due to an illness he had suffered as a baby, he had only a 15% chance of ever having a child, with the likelihood greater while he and Erin were young. They had their first, Lucy, when they were 22; their second, Norah, two years later. They recently announced Erin is pregnant again; the baby is due in May.
In April, Simon Hattenstone met Sara Ryan, the mother of Connor Sparrowhawk, who drowned in a bath three years ago, aged 18, at a residential unit run by Southern Health, an NHS foundation trust. His death eventually led to the finding that Southern Health had, between 2011 and 2015, failed properly to investigate the deaths of more than 700 people with learning disabilities or mental health problems. In August, chief executive Katrina Percy stepped down, only to be given a new advisory role. In October, she left Southern Health; the trust’s board said public feedback had led it to decide it was “no longer possible for her to continue”.
In May, Annie Kelly and Mei-Ling McNamara investigated the case of four Bangladeshi men trafficked into slavery in a remote hotel in the Scottish Highlands. In 2008, they were deceived into paying thousands of pounds for a visa, only to find themselves doing forced labour and abused by their employer, who was later jailed for three years. Readers set up a crowdfunding site to help with legal fees, and raised nearly £12,000 in four weeks. MPs in Scotland appealed directly to the Home Office to grant the men the right to remain. Last month, despite their being recognised as victims of trafficking and having served as key witnesses in the prosecution of their trafficker, their applications were rejected. They are now on their final appeal and face deportation.
In July, after a gap of 13 years, John Vidal returned to Gumbi, the Malawian village where no child had ever had more than two years’ secondary schooling. Today the village is more optimistic. The money contributed by readers in 2003 has resulted in two schools being rebuilt. Without being asked, readers this year contributed a further £25,000, which means two community libraries can be built, equipped with books donated by Book Aid International.
In July, Simon Hattenstone spoke to the family of Michael Sandford, an autistic young man jailed in May for grabbing a gun at a Donald Trump rally in Las Vegas and saying he wanted to kill Trump. He was charged with disrupting an official function and two firearm offences. His mother, Lynne Sandford, revealed that Michael was suicidal. Readers raised more than £10,000 to help with his legal bills. This month, he was sentenced to 12 months in prison. Judge James Mahan told him: “You have a medical problem. You should not be ashamed or embarrassed about it… I don’t think you wanted to kill anybody.” Lynne Sandford was hugely touched by the support from readers, saying, “Michael passes on his sincerest thanks. I’m glad readers realise that, despite what he attempted to do, he’s not a bad person at heart.”
In August, novelist Mary Paulson-Ellis followed the story of Mr Lobban, an elderly man who died in Edinburgh with no next-of-kin and an ambiguous identity. Several people who knew him got in touch. Buff Hardie, an undergraduate with Mr Lobban at Aberdeen University in the early 50s, described a young man with “a flawless Oxbridge accent”, often the target of a gossip column in the student newspaper.
An email from Douglas Cameron placed Lobban next in Cambridge, a dapper man “like a young David Suchet playing Poirot”, teaching English as a foreign language. The first sighting of him in Edinburgh is in the 70s, remembered as someone “well-informed and amusing”, but skilled at deflecting questions.
Mr Lobban’s neighbour of 20 years got in touch to say she found him charming, though eccentric. He was a divisive figure, especially latterly, when his hoarding became extreme. She discovered a Jewish genealogy website detailing the fate of his father, Martin Krebs, who died at Auschwitz in 1944. Paulson-Ellis says, “It was a thrill to hear from those who knew Mr Lobban – an afterlife of sorts for the article and for him.”
Fifty-two matches, various kisses (some more awkward than others) and a handful of second dates: Cupid has had a busy year in our Blind date column. We can happily report that Tom and Emily (29 October) are still dating, even though he forgot her name the first time. “I’ve worn my full hi-vis cycle look in front of him,” Emily says, “and it didn’t put him off.”
Michael’s date with Rebecca (9 April) also led to a match – with a friend of a friend saw the article and got in touch. “I will always remember 2016 as the year when a reckless gamble paid off,” Michael says. “So if you’re in two minds, take the plunge.”
• Where did it all go right? For a more positive view of the world in 2017, follow the Guardian’s Half Full online series, with reports on innovative ideas and solutions to the challenges of the day. Wishing you all a happier new year.
Born in Edinburgh, Irvine Welsh was working for the council and studying for an MBA at Heriot-Watt University when he wrote Trainspotting. Published in 1993, the novel was a hit, and in 1996 was made into a film by Danny Boyle. A sequel is released next month, and an immersive theatre adaptation of the original book runs at The Vaults, London SE1, until 15 January. Welsh’s latest novel, The Blade Artist, was published this year. He is married for the second time and lives in Chicago.
When were you happiest? 
Happiness is mostly intrinsic: you’re either a happy soul or a miserable bastard. Fortunately, I’m the former.
What is your greatest fear? 
I don’t fear death, but I do fear being taken from loved ones. I’m also concerned that it might be shite.
What is your earliest memory?
Saying goodnight to Bunny, an imaginatively named toy rabbit.
Which living person do you most admire, and why?
Artists who do their own thing, without compromise: Ken Loach, Bob Dylan and James Kelman.
What was your most embarrassing moment?
One place I worked, the boss asked how I was getting on. I told him about one woman who was a nightmare. His face went ashen. I later found out she was his wife.
What is your screensaver?
The aftermath of David Gray’s winner in the Scottish Cup final.
What do you most dislike about your appearance?
Saggy skin, wrinkles and creases.
Who would play you in the film of your life?
There’s nobody cool enough.
What is your most unappealing habit?
Raw greed.
What is your favourite smell?
The sea. I run down to the lake in Chicago every day to take in that massive inland sea.
Which book changed your life?
Trainspotting. It gave me money, fame and freedom.
What is the worst thing anyone’s said to you?
“I just don’t recognise you any more and I don’t want to spend any more time getting to know an unlikable stranger who is the very same as every other drug addict.” That was devastatingly hard to take, but it was (eventually) very helpful.
What is your guiltiest pleasure?
A chocolate doughnut, after my boxing training.
What does love feel like?
When you can barely stand to look at someone without turning away to catch your breath.
Which living person do you most despise, and why?
I have the capacity to dislike anybody, but it’s only fleeting; I don’t have the emotional energy actively to despise them.
What is the worst job you’ve done?
Laying down slabs for the council.
How often do you have sex?
If I don’t have sex every day, I start to go a bit weird. It makes travelling difficult.
What is the closest you’ve come to death?
When a pal grabbed hold of me as I fell into an unbanistered stairwell at a rave. Would have been curtains, but for his sharp reaction.
What do you consider your greatest achievement?
I haven’t achieved anything of note yet.
What has been your biggest disappointment?
There’s been the odd beauty on the dance floor I really ought to have gone home with.
It’s Christmas Eve, and you need to spruce up the house for tomorrow, but the shops are heaving and you don’t want to venture out. What to do? It’s time to get creative with whatever you can find in your house and garden.
If your Christmas table is looking bare, raid your garden for greenery and make a centrepiece in minutes. Flower farmer and florist Georgie Newbery of Common Farm Flowers recommends using a bucket, jug or deep bowl (a cut-glass trifle bowl, say) rather than a vase. Use Blu-Tack to secure a candle or three (either stout church candles or dipped candles) in the base, and make a grid out of sticky tape across the top of the container to keep the candles and foliage upright. Fill the bowl with water, then pick a huge bunch of whatever’s looking good (Newbery suggests hazel catkins, flowering viburnums, ivy berries, willow stems, pittosporum and griselinia); slot them into the grid of tape around the candles.
Make holly leaf place cards. Cut holly-shaped leaves in red and green card, fold in half lengthways, and write place names (ideally in a metallic pen) on the side that’s standing up.
Alternatively, create rosemary sprig placeholders. Cut card into squares; collect small sprigs of rosemary from the garden, leaving a twiggy end; attach this onto the top corner of each card using fancy tape; and write on guests’ names.
Scatter the table with the littlest pine cones you can find. Even better, dip them in gold paint.
Fetch a branch from the garden; apple tree prunings and stems of Japanese quince work well, but anything will do. Place in a heavy, wide-based vase or pot and weigh down with as much ballast as you can to stop it toppling over. Cover in silver or white paint, or leave it natural, particularly if it is crusted with lichen. Hang with your most beautiful baubles. Alternatively, decorate a large houseplant: think swiss cheese plant (Monstera deliciosa), pothos vine or weeping fig (Ficus benjamina).
If you have a tree that’s looking rather bare, raid the bathroom cabinet for cotton wool balls. Set any relatives who are at a loose end to work – thread a needle with cotton, sew through the balls, and dot them round the tree. Hey presto, soft, fluffy snowballs. Alternatively, enlist children to help bake gingerbread men. Make a hole in the top before you bake them, then when they’re cool, ice in festive colours and thread leftover ribbon through to hang from the branches. Complete the homemade look with orange (or satsuma, or clementine) slice decorations. Cut an unpeeled fruit into round slices, bake on a low heat for a couple of hours to dry out, then thread some ribbon or twine through the top of each slice.
If you have a spare large, plain bauble, either plastic or glass, you can make a personalised decoration that can double as an impromptu gift. Dig out a paint set, and paint a child or adult’s hand all over with white acrylic paint – do this by the sink so they can wash their hands as soon as you are finished. Get them to grasp the bauble lightly but firmly from below so they make a hand print, with the palm covering the base and the fingers pointing towards the top. Once this is completely dry, use permanent markers to turn each finger into a jolly snowman: pebble smile, carrot nose, hat, scarf and so on. There are lots of good examples online, if you want a visual guide. This can also serve as a last-minute present for grandparents.
Dawn Isaac, author of 101 Things For Kids To Do Outside, suggests raiding the garden for twigs to make star decorations; lash them together with twine, string or ribbons. Any pliable twig will do, but red or yellow dogwood stems or bright green willows look particularly eye-catching.
You can also make simple wreaths by bending some stems into a circle and binding them with twine, then adorning with fluffy clematis seedheads, dried chillies, pine cones and anything else you can lay your hands on.
If you have wire hanging baskets left over from summer, lash a couple together into a globe shape using wire or even cable ties. Wrap them in outdoor fairy lights and hang by the front door.
If you need to add some glamour to a parcel, turn to nature. Evergreen foliage such as ivy, fern leaves, sprigs of conifer or eucalyptus or even your Christmas tree make simple, stylish adornments: bind them to presents with twine or ribbon. Try graphic designer Twan van Keulen’s trick of cutting letters from large leathery leaves using a craft knife. Use the letters to make up names to stick on to parcels.
If you’ve forgotten a gift for a loved one and don’t fancy shops full of panicked present-buyers, Alys Fowler suggests putting together bouquets garnis of fresh herbs. Cut small sprigs of rosemary, a bay leaf or two, sage, parsley and thyme from the garden (or from pots in the kitchen) and tie tightly with kitchen string at the base. For a neater look, wrap a bay leaf around the base of the bunch, then wrap the string tightly around several times.
Alys also recommends digging up some bulbs that are just starting to poke their heads above the soil (snowdrops or early crocuses are ideal) and potting them into a pretty container small enough to perch on a windowsill: forced this way they should burst into flower for a little cheer before it all really happens outside. Happy Christmas!
On the evening of 8 November, the world gathered in front of TV screens for the news. In the early hours of 9 November, it began to dawn on us that what we were watching was no longer news but history. Not since 9/11 could many recall such a sense of incredulous dread, and as Florida fell to Donald Trump, I found myself seized by an eerie premonition. I saw schoolchildren turning over history examination papers in the future, to find a question as predictable and familiar to their generation as one about the origins of the second world war had been to mine: “Identify and analyse the parallels,” it would read, “between the 1930s and the 2010s.”
No one yet knows how 2016 will be remembered, and if Boris Johnson turns out to be right, we will wonder why anyone ever worried about the arrival of another “liberal guy from New York” in the White House. If, however, pupils do one day have to answer that exam question, they might well begin by observing that we were every bit as slow as our forefathers to recognise impending catastrophe.
When David Cameron returned from Brussels in February, brandishing his peace-in-our-time renegotiated EU membership terms – can anyone now even remember what they were? – it looked as if the referendum promised nothing more sinister than the entertaining spectacle of the government tearing itself apart. No one was surprised to see Iain Duncan Smith, Chris Grayling, John Whittingdale and Theresa Villiers side with Vote Leave, but Michael Gove’s defection was a bombshell. When Johnson followed a day later, “after a huge amount of heartache”, the audacity of the pretence that he was acting on deeply held anti-EU conviction fooled nobody. As the columnist Nick Cohen put it after the vote, “There are liars, and then there’s Boris.”
In Johnson’s defence, he wasn’t the only one exploiting Europe for personal ambition. Cameron’s motives for calling the referendum had little to do with principle and everything to do with neutralising Ukip’s threat and silencing internal dissent. Europe had been a toxic nuisance to Tory leaders for 40 years, and back in 2006 Cameron famously blamed “banging on about Europe” for his party’s unpopularity (“Instead of talking about the things that most people care about,” he declared, “we talked about what we cared about most”). By the time the campaign began, fevered speculation about its implications for the Tories left little room for much thought about the damage it could do to the country.
The remain campaign imagined they’d put this right by orchestrating a chorus of hair-raising warnings. Everyone from Mark Carney to Richard Branson, the TUC to the IMF, warned of economic Armageddon. Such a powerful consensus seemed so self-evidently persuasive to remain campaigners that when voters said they were fed up with Project Fear, they refused to believe them and wheeled out President Obama, only to give leave another boost in the polls. “Bring Obama back again!” Nigel Farage gloated gleefully. “Let’s have another visit!” The then Ukip leader was more attuned than most to the new populist mood of anti-elite resentment; and when Gove told us “the people of this country have had enough of experts”, liberals were so quick to ridicule him that few considered the possibility he might, in fact, be right.
In a year when the phrase “post-truth” entered the Oxford Dictionary, and fake news helped win the White House, facts were at best worthless and at worst a liability. Once again, many of us were slow to grasp the implications of this new paradigm. Focus groups of undecided voters told remain’s leaders that their minds would be made up by hard facts – and were taken at their word. Remain duly kept churning out data – Brexit would cost “£4,300 per household”, claimed George Osborne – apparently unaware that no one likes to think, let alone admit, that what really informs their decisions is much more elusive and emotional. In the febrile new mood of 2016, remain’s threat that you would lose “vital EU funding for the farming, scientific and medical research and programmes that make a real difference in your local community” was no match for the potent promise of leave’s “Take back control”.
For a fleeting moment, the campaign seemed almost festive, when Bob Geldof and Farage traded insults across the Thames from rival flotillas. The leave boats had Joey Essex on board, while the 60s soul song The In Crowd blasted out from Geldof’s. The referendum had everyone talking, and optimists could feasibly mistake the national conversation for a unifying moment. But seven days before the vote, the mood darkened. Ukip revealed its infamous Breaking Point poster, an almost exact copy of footage from a Nazi propaganda film; hours later, an idealistic young pro-EU Labour MP was shot and stabbed to death on the street in her constituency by a Nazi sympathiser shouting “Britain first”. Even Farage privately admitted that Jo Cox’s murder would finish off leave’s chances, and liberals, though deeply shaken, assumed such grotesque ugliness couldn’t fail to bring the country to its senses. All the polls agreed.
They were wrong. On 23 June, 52% of us chose instead to vote for chaos; by breakfast the following morning, the prime minister had resigned, and even Johnson and Gove looked shell-shocked. Within days, they would destroy one another in a Shakespearean bloodbath to succeed Cameron. Once Andrea Leadsom’s misapprehension that motherhood qualified her for the job had ruled her out, Theresa May was the only one left standing, and thus became our new prime minister.
But if the Tories’ leadership race was unedifying, Labour MPs could only look on with envy. Incensed by Jeremy Corbyn’s absenteeism during the referendum campaign, more than 60 resigned from the shadow front bench, and days later 172 voted no confidence in their leader. Corbynistas retaliated with a torrent of online abuse, much of it violent and misogynistic, and a brick through leadership challenger Angela Eagle’s window put paid to any hope of a “kinder, gentler politics”. After an inflammatory summer of courtroom battles, allegations of MI5 infiltrators, rock star-style Corbyn rallies and squabbles over a £25 fee to vote, Corbyn was duly re-elected Labour leader, and promptly vanished from view again.
Historians will probably argue for ever about why we voted to leave the EU, but none could conclude that immigration played little part. The 58% spike in hate crimes that followed the vote only confirmed what the result had already told us: our compassion for migrants had curdled into fearful hostility as the crisis in mainland Europe spiralled. Hungary declared a nationwide state of emergency, and Italy replaced Greece as the people traffickers’ destination of choice, with 180,000 reaching its shores this year. The likelihood of drowning while crossing the Med narrowed from the previous year’s record of one in 269, to just one in 88; but sympathy hardened as the crisis became fatally entwined in public minds with the Islamic terror attacks rocking the continent.
Seven of the nine jihadis who attacked Paris late last year, killing 130, were reported to have smuggled themselves into Europe disguised as Syrian refugees. In March, Brussels became the next target, when bombs at the airport and a metro station killed more than 30 and injured 300. But July was to be the deadliest month: Bastille Day celebrations on a balmy night in Nice became a massacre when a Tunisian man drove a truck into the crowds, killing 86 and injuring more than 400. Twelve days later, two 19-year-old jihadis forced an 85-year-old priest to kneel at his own altar in a Normandy church and slit his throat. In Germany, an Afghan asylum seeker ran amok with an axe on a train, a Syrian refugee blew up a wine bar, another hacked a colleague to death with a machete, and a German-Iranian teenage gunman went on a rampage, killing nine. Earlier this week, a Tunisian asylum seeker was was shot dead by Italian police after being identified as the man who drove a truck into a Berlin Christmas market, killing at least 12 people.
Measures that would only recently have been unthinkable were passed with little public protest. Denmark introduced a law authorising the confiscation of jewellery and cash from asylum seekers to pay for their care, undeterred by UN warnings against fuelling “fear and xenophobia”. French seaside resorts imposed a burkini ban, leading to the surreal spectacle of armed policemen ordering Muslim women on beaches to undress, which was reversed not by public revulsion (opinion polls found two-thirds of French people in favour) but a court ruling. When the migrant camp in Calais was bulldozed, Britain agreed to take its unaccompanied minors, only for our tabloids to whip up outrage about arrivals who didn’t “look” under 18. A Tory backbencher proposed subjecting them to dental tests, to determine if they were deserving of British kindness.
The three biggest nationalities pouring into Europe were fleeing conflicts caused by events long predating 2016 and not confined within their borders. Fifteen years after western coalition forces first sought revenge for 9/11, Afghanistan and Iraq remain locked in bloody turmoil, but it was the tragedy of Syria that horrified the world this year. Five years into civil war, the president, Bashar al-Assad, remained undefeated and the international community paralysed, unable to decide which, if any, side to support.
Diplomatic scruples did not inhibit Vladimir Putin, who was all too happy to fill the vacuum. Any hope that Russian airstrikes on Syria would be confined to Isis targets soon faded as Moscow subjected eastern Aleppo to the same ruthless bombardment that had once reduced Grozny to rubble. Cluster and barrel bombs rained down on civilian homes and hospitals, even a UN aid convoy, rendering Aleppo our Guernica and killing more civilians, according to one NGO monitoring the war (the UN-sanctioned Syrian Network for Human Rights), than even Isis has. The world was shaken by footage of a shell-shocked five-year-old boy being pulled from the wreckage of his home, coated in grey dust, dazed – but still it wasn’t moved to act. “All the world has failed us,” a resident of Aleppo despaired. “The city is dying. Rapidly by bombardment, and slowly by hunger and fear of the advance of the Assad regime.” As the year drew to a close, the fall of Aleppo to Assad became inevitable, and from the ruins of one of the world’s oldest cities rose a resurgent Kremlin, restored as a global superpower.
A once faintly ridiculous figure, mocked in the west for his fondness for posing topless, Putin could plausibly claim to be the most influential world leader of 2016. For the first time in history, a Russian president was accused of deploying cyber warfare to influence the outcome of a US presidential election. Putin denied the CIA’s charge, but few in Washington doubted that he was behind the Russian hackers who infiltrated Democratic National Committee email servers and the private email account of Hillary Clinton’s campaign chairman, releasing material calculated to embarrass and undermine their candidate. Her rival had even urged Moscow to hack her account: “Russia, if you’re listening,” he declared at a press conference in July, “I hope you’re able to find the 30,000 emails that are missing.” In the words of one stunned Clinton aide: “This has to be the first time that a major presidential candidate has actively encouraged a foreign power to conduct espionage against his political opponent.”
But it was only one of many firsts in a US presidential election unlike any the world had seen. When Donald J Trump entered the race, few imagined the reality star and property tycoon with four business bankruptcies and two ex-wives behind him stood a chance against the most qualified Democratic candidate in history. This would be the year America elected its first female president, not the first leader of the free world to have never held public office. Pundits shook their heads and laughed back in January when Trump told a rally, “I could stand in the middle of 5th Avenue and shoot somebody and I wouldn’t lose any voters.” Who was he kidding? Every bizarre step he took towards November’s vote was judged by sniggering pundits to be leading him farther from the White House.
Build a wall on the Mexican border to keep out all those Latino rapists? The idea was surely absurd. Punish women for having abortions? Even pro-lifers were appalled. July’s Republican Convention was meant to confer respectability on Trump’s maverick campaign, but unravelled into farce after his wife, Melania, delivered a speech lifted verbatim from one Michelle Obama made eight years earlier. Matters only got worse when Trump launched a Twitter attack on the Muslim parents of a US soldier killed fighting in Iraq. The following week he suggested a Clinton presidency could be dealt with by “the Second Amendment people”, by which he could only mean that they assassinate her.
When a tape emerged of Trump boasting in 2005 about grabbing women “by the pussy” and getting away with it because he was famous, he retaliated by inviting three women who had accused Bill Clinton of inappropriate sexual conduct to the next presidential debate. The tape was nothing but “locker room banter”, Trump scoffed, showcasing his unparalleled gift for post-truth politics with the solemn assertion: “Nobody has more respect for women than I do.” He announced his intention to jail Clinton if he won. Even George W Bush’s former secretary for homeland security was appalled: “It smacks of what we read about tinpot dictators in other parts of the world.”
Trump dismissed as “liars” the 12 women who came forward to accuse him of having acted out his banter. Some, he sneered, weren’t even good-looking enough for him to sexually assault. “Look at her,” he mocked one. Of another: “That would not be my first choice.” In the campaign’s final weeks, what caution he ever had was thrown to the wind, as he led rallies in a mob chant of “Lock her up!”, “Build that wall!” and “Drain the swamp!” Channelling his new best friend Farage, he urged America to make 8 November “our independence day”.
As Noam Chomsky observed, “Every time Trump makes a nasty comment about whoever, his popularity goes up. Because it’s based on hate, you know. Hate and fear,” he warned, “reminiscent of something unpleasant: Germany, not many years ago.” Yet even at the 11th hour, when the FBI reopened its investigation into Clinton’s private email server, the polls still assured the world Trump could not win. And then, on 8 November, a man widely described as a sociopathic bully, grandiose narcissist, dangerous demagogue and pathological liar, who scored higher than Hitler in an Oxford University study of psychopathic tendencies, became the 45th president of the USA. It was indeed “Brexit plus plus plus”, celebrated by America’s white supremacist “alt-right” movement with cries of “Hail Trump!” and rigid one-armed Nazi salutes. In the words of veteran constitutional historian Professor Vernon Bogdanor, Trump’s election was “the most troubling political event in my lifetime. It’s not difficult to arouse nationalist passions. We saw that in the 1930s.”
The world waits to see whether President Trump will govern as he campaigned. So far he has appointed a Texan oilman and Putin ally as secretary of state, put a retired general nicknamed Mad Dog in charge of defence, a climate change denier in charge of the Environmental Protection Agency, and chosen for his chief strategist the head of Breitbart news. His foreign heroes are Putin and Farage, and his preferred medium for conducting international diplomacy is Twitter. At the very moment when America’s system of checks and balances has never been more necessary, his party controls the White House, the house and the senate.
Meanwhile, the global institutions designed to keep us safe are in trouble. The UN secretary general used to be a household name, but Ban Ki-moon’s only discernible achievement in eight years was to make himself and the UN so invisible that most of the world would struggle to recognise, let alone name, his successor taking office in January. (It’s António Guterres.) The head of the IMF, Christine Lagarde, has gone on trial in France charged with criminal negligence, and Nato’s member states have failed to pay their dues for so long that they could hardly be surprised by Trump’s reluctance to carry on bankrolling an “obsolete” institution costing the US “a fortune”. The fourth estate’s future has become increasingly fragile, too, as readers and viewers defected to the raunchier wilds of social media, and politicians from left and right discovered they could escape scrutiny from the mainstream media by simply snubbing it. When Facebook is the primary source of many voters’ news, and a conspiracy theory as crazy as Pizzagate (which linked Hillary Clinton and other Democrats to a child-abuse network run from a Washington pizzeria) can command global attention, how the powerful will be held to account is no longer clear.
If western liberal democracy reached its high point with the fall of the Berlin Wall, by the end of this year its very survival began to look in doubt. As Timothy Garton Ash put it, 2016 was “1989 in reverse”. The far right is on the rise across Europe; Marine Le Pen is a frontrunner in 2017’s French presidential election; and even if Angela Merkel holds on to power next year, the anti-immigration, populist, far-right Alternative for Germany is predicted to win seats in the Bundestag. It is with this fractured and fractious EU that Britain will negotiate the terms of its departure, cheered on by flag-waving tabloids, unconstrained by a functioning opposition, and we will finally find out what “Brexit means Brexit” means.
How did all of this happen? Following David Bowie’s death in January, and Britain’s vote to leave in June, the actor Paul Bettany tweeted one suggestion: “In January I dismissed my mate’s theory that David Bowie was the glue holding the universe together but I don’t know man... I don’t know.” After so many shockwaves and dramas, it was tempting to view the year as a freak surge of ahistorical exceptionalism, analogous to nothing and a law unto itself. History will see it differently. Just as the legacy of the great crash of 1929 took several years to manifest itself, so the consequences of the financial crash of 2008 are only now becoming clear. There was nothing magical or inexplicable about 2016. We were merely reminded of what happens when most of us do not have enough money, and a few of us have much too much.
Additional research by Matilda Munro
• Where did it all go right? For a more positive view of the world in 2017, follow the Guardian’s Half Full online series, with reports on innovative ideas and solutions to the challenges of the day. Wishing you all a happier new year.
With a smile as brilliant as her gold and green headtie, Margaret praised the Lord. “We never imagined we would see this day,” she said. “With the help of God, we were able to come out of bondage.” Around her, another 20 young women and their relatives, many in equally spectacular traditional dress provided by delighted authorities, danced and sang, and sometimes sobbed.
For more than two years, the girls, from a small Christian town in the predominantly Muslim far north-east of Nigeria, had been held by Boko Haram, the Islamic militant group linked to Islamic State. They were among more than 250 female students abducted from their school during a night raid in April 2014. At least 50 managed to escape hours after the attack, but the rest, kept by their captors in a series of forest camps, were given a choice: convert and marry, or become a servant.
The mass abduction prompted a global outcry, and an international campaign to #BringBackOurGirls. Yet the story slipped from the headlines. Desultory negotiations for the girls’ release went nowhere. The bloody campaign against the militants ground on, with some success but no sign of the students, other than a glimpse in a propaganda video released by the extremists. Some were said to have been killed in a government bombing; others by disease. Two made their own way to freedom, one with a child fathered by a militant. But the rest remained.
The girls were released on 13 October, after weeks of talks brokered by western officials, and flown to the capital, Abuja, where they received medical attention and counselling. Their families, travelling from Chibok, faced a 500-mile drive on potholed roads, slowed by military checkpoints and the fear of attack by insurgents. But they made it at last, embracing their children in emotional scenes at a church service.
Almost immediately came more worries. The father of one of the girls told reporters he was concerned their release would be exploited for political gain. “People’s children are not money, people’s children are not clothes you wear to campaign,” he said. “People’s children are their pride.”
Other observers quietly pointed out that the girls who had escaped earlier had faced ostracism and abuse. Mausi Segun, a researcher in Nigeria for Human Rights Watch, said the negative reaction of conservative communities would mean it was unlikely those released would be able to return to Chibok. “Any sign that there has been sexual contact with any man – and these men are Boko Haram – will cause a backlash. The likelihood they will return home is slim.” There have been reports that many of those still in captivity, aware of the stigmatisation they will face, were unwilling to return to their communities.
But on that day in October, there was simple celebration, and the problems to come were forgotten. Jason Burke. Margaret is a pseudonym
“The Ross Sea is a polar garden of Eden – it’s truly astonishing when you sail there,” Lewis Pugh says. A British endurance swimmer who has plunged into icy waters around the world in the name of conservation, he says this part of Antarctica deserves its reputation for being one of the few almost pristine ecosystems left in the world.
“You see humpback whales, leopard seals, Adélie and Emperor penguins and albatrosses. You get a feel for what the world used to be like before man put his and her hand on it,” the 47-year-old says.
On 1 December 2017, 1.5m sq km of the region will be declared a marine protected area (MPA), with two-thirds off limits to fishing, under an agreement reached in October. Illegal fishing in the area has devastated stocks of the Patagonian toothfish, which led Prince Charles to write to government ministers, pleading with them to save the species and the birds that depend on it.
Reaching consensus on the MPA’s creation was tortuous, with Russia and China blocking a deal for years. That’s partly why conservationists celebrated 2016’s breakthrough so loudly. “It’s hugely significant and historic, and not just because of the number of players,” says Andrea Kavanagh, an Antarctic expert at Pew Charitable Trusts, of the EU and 24 other nations involved. “This was also the first time a multilateral body [CCAMLR] had decided to protect the high seas in a huge way.”
While John Kerry, the US secretary of state, lobbied the Chinese, Pugh’s job was to meet and persuade the top levels of Russian government using his brand of “Speedo diplomacy”. “I think the real tipping point was when Putin appointed Sergei Ivanov as ecologist tsar,” the swimmer says. A former chief of staff for Putin, Ivanov is “passionate about the environment” and a “very hands-on, practical type of person”, Pugh says.
Both Kavanagh and Pugh see the deal as a victory not just for the environment, but for international cooperation. “It’s a sign of hope in a very difficult year,” Kavanagh says. “There are still things all countries can agree on together.”
“We can still see Antarctica as a place for peace- and bridge-building,” Pugh agrees.
Conservationists have their sights set on three more MPAs around Antarctica, and Pugh is back among the wild waves to campaign for them. After speaking to the Guardian from Cape Horn, he swam around the tip of South America, only to have to get back into the roiling waters a second time; he had misjudged the distance and stopped 150m short on his first attempt. Adam Vaughan
BBC1 could have broadcast round-the-clock coverage of vomit slowly evaporating on a hot pavement that second weekend of November and we’d have fallen to our knees, thankful for the distraction. Instead, just when we needed it most, we got a full-strength punch of joy: Ed Balls dancing Gangnam Style on Strictly Come Dancing.
Find a video of the routine and look at his face. Look into his eyes. This is the former chair of the Fabian Society, indiscriminately smashing his hips around to a song about overt consumerism. His cheeks are puffed out, and he’s mouthing the word “bum” over and over again. At one point, he hops up and down like a happy little horse, while his partner kicks and flails between his legs. This is the former cabinet minister, a senior fellow at Harvard, jerking around as if he’s being defibrillated – and it might count as the best thing he’s ever done.
That same weekend, the BBC broadcast footage of a bear, pole dancing against a tree, captured during the making of Planet Earth II. The impact was the same – a powerful figure cutting loose and making a fool of itself – but the context subtly different. That bear had no cultural touch points. It needed to scratch its back. Balls, though? He was doing the whole thing on purpose.
Two weeks later, he was eliminated from Strictly, and Planet Earth II once again became a show about scorpions stabbing bats in the head. Bloody 2016. Stuart Heritage
The invisible machinations of “PJS”, the showbiz spouse who this year persuaded the courts to prevent reporting of a threesome, renewed discussion about whether there is a human right to a private life. Meanwhile, a number of artists and broadcasters made their claim on a private death: Terry Wogan, Alan Rickman, David Bowie, Victoria Wood, Caroline Aherne and Ronnie Corbett all died from terminal illnesses in such a way that the news came as a terrible shock. Leonard Cohen had inadvertently let the raven out of the bag, telling the New Yorker that he was “ready to die” just before he did; but he won a victory for privacy by managing to die in Los Angeles and be buried in Montreal, before either event was reported.
Cohen and Bowie were remarkable for having achieved the artistic equivalent of putting their affairs in order: both wrote and recorded albums that they knew to be final testaments; each dropped a hint derived from scripture. Bowie’s Blackstar, released three days before his death, featured the song Lazarus, (“Look at me, I’m in Heaven”), while Cohen’s You Want It Darker, released 17 days before the singer died, employs as a chorus “Hineni”, or “Here I am”, the Hebrew words used by Moses and Abraham when called by God.
Rickman also left a memorial for his fans, playing a British general in the excellent and posthumously released movie, Eye In The Sky. Wogan had just published his first book of fiction, a form in which he had long wanted to write. Wood was so private her friends say she would not want her final weeks to be discussed, even posthumously. More importantly, all the quietly departed seem, from the accounts that have emerged, to have had the conversations and made the last arrangements they wanted.
This autumn, the BBC broadcaster Steve Hewlett and the writer AA Gill chose the opposite approach, writing or talking publicly about their experiences as late-stage cancer patients. Both routes towards the exit should be available, but the discreet path has opened up in a way that few would have imagined possible for the very famous. In the year of Brexit, hard or soft, the quiet exit became a way of death. Mark Lawson
In a year that will be remembered for the normalisation of bigotry, it was uplifting to hear a member of the royal family condemn racism and sexism. For any lucky sod who hibernated through the year, Prince Harry’s new girlfriend Meghan Markle is, controversially, a US actor who has removed items of clothing on screen. Even more controversially, she is a divorcee. And most controversial of all, she is mixed race.
The Sun ran a front page story with the headline “HARRY GIRL’S ON PORNHUB”, a reference to the internet pornography site that featured her in clips from the TV series Suits. A number of newspapers noted with surprise that she was a “brunette”, which appeared to be a euphemism of sorts. The Daily Mail ran a story headlined “Harry’s girl is (almost) straight outta Compton”. And that headline is (almost) straight outta the textbook of racist stereotyping.
Prince Harry responded with a statement commenting on “the wave of abuse and harassment” to which Markle had been subjected, referring to “the smear on the front page of a national newspaper; the racial undertones of comment pieces; and the outright sexism and racism of social media trolls and web article comments”.
I’ve always associated the British royal family with fuelling prejudice rather than combating it: from the Queen Mother supporting white supremacist rule in Rhodesia and telling Woodrow Wyatt she had “some reservations about Jews”; to Prince Philip telling a student in China, “If you stay here much longer, you’ll go home with slitty eyes”; to Harry himself in a swastika armband at a fancy dress party in 2005, and talking of a fellow soldier as “our little Paki friend” in 2009.
Harry’s swastika was offensive and stupid, as was his racist description of the soldier. And yes, he might only have condemned the press this time because it was personal. But the fact is, he spoke out against racism, and as far as I know that is a first for Britain’s royal family. He deserves a big pat on his overprivileged back. Simon Hattenstone
For Americans expecting shattered glass on 8 November, the election of Donald Trump was devastating. But the night did usher in a handful of Democratic women whose elections broke barriers and made history.
Pramila Jayapal was the first Indian-American woman elected to the US House of Representatives. Having immigrated to the US from India at 16, election night was “bittersweet” for her. The team learned of Jayapal’s victory just as the news networks declared Trump the next president. “It is not the Congress I wanted to come into, but I’ve never backed down from a fight before, and I won’t start now,” Jayapal tells me.
Democrats are preparing for long battles over equal rights and justice. “I will fight to make sure we don’t backtrack on the human and civil rights of our people,” says Oregon governor Kate Brown, who is bisexual and the nation’s first openly LGBT governor. Minnesota elected Ilhan Omar as state representative, the first female Somali-American Muslim lawmaker.
These elections, alongside those of Kamala Harris in California, who became the first Indian-American senator, and Tammy Duckworth in Illinois, the first Thai-American senator, were celebrated as glimmers of hope in the face of Trump’s victory.
As was Nevada’s election of Catherine Cortez Masto, the first Latina in the US Senate. “I have received letters and emails from little girls who are excited to see a woman in a big role,” she says. “It’s humbling.” Lauren Gambino
In a year when the liberal left lost elections across the globe, would anyone have batted an eyelid if Austria, of all places, had presented the EU with its first far-right head of state of the postwar era?
In May, Norbert Hofer, the youthful, puppy-eyed deputy leader of the anti-immigration Freedom party, lost the presidential vote by the narrowest of margins. Then, thanks to irregularities in the postal vote count, his party won an appeal for a rerun and everything seemed to be going in their favour: a year of campaigning had softened the radical right’s image and most polls had Hofer ahead. And yet, on 4 December, Austria bucked the western trend, sidelining Hofer in favour of Alexander Van der Bellen, a former leader of the Green party, who had run as an independent.
To call it a sea change might be to overstate it (after all, 46.2% of Austrians voted for a candidate from a party founded by former Nazis) but there’s a positive here that should not be forgotten. Van der Bellen, 72, a mellow retired economist, gave a glimpse of what unusual shapes the fightback against rightwing populism can take. An unshaven chain-smoker from a disadvantaged background, with an aversion to buzzwords, he was arguably a better “anti-establishment” candidate than Hofer, who entered political life at 23 and worked as a rhetoric coach. Van der Bellen ran a positive, inclusive campaign, summed up by his slogan: “Those who love their homeland don’t divide it.”
A clear majority of female voters (62%, up from 54% in May) voted for him. One, an 89-year-old Holocaust survivor, approached Van der Bellen’s campaign the week before the election. The resulting video, in which she warned that Hofer’s party brought out “the basest in people, not the decent, but the indecent”, became a viral hit and may have helped swing the vote in the liberal candidate’s favour. Philip Oltermann
Just when we thought reality television couldn’t sink any lower, having delivered a summer of public sex followed by public shaming, the unexpected happened: the 16th season of I’m A Celebrity… featured a bunch of polite people getting along very nicely. And hugging a lot.
“I think it was just what the country needed,” says Joel Dommett, the comedian who came second in the contest. “Viewers enjoyed watching people having nice conversations around a campfire. I sat there thinking, ‘I am being horrifically unentertaining’, but everyone seems to have enjoyed it.”
It was an unlikely group of new BFFs. The 69-year-old actor Larry Lamb became a second father to the street dancer Jordan Banjo. Gogglebox star (and eventual winner) Scarlett Moffatt was delightfully starstruck by Carol Vorderman as they ate turkey testicles and camel nipples. Even the bloke from Homes Under The Hammer eventually stopped whining and became agreeable. “He was the first person in the camp who wasn’t positive,” Dommett says, “but we sort of infected him with our positivity, and then he was flying.”
Did the producers deliberately cast an uncontentious group as a tonic to a year overrun by conflict? Or, more likely, did they just strike a bit dull? Either way, the result was unexpectedly heartwarming. As Dommett says, “People were just being normal and real with each other. Instead of pissing on the street and giving blowjobs in a hot tub.” Abigail Radnor
• Joel Dommett is on tour with Joel Dommett: Live In 2017; go to joeldommett.com for details.
Thousands of Britons are killed on the road every year. It’s one of those things we seem to have quietly accepted as the cost of modernity, alongside climate change, internet piracy and Facebook. So it’s odd to think that, within a decade, road deaths could plausibly be a thing of the past. Self-driving cars have the potential to reshape society, leading to a world in which the boundaries blur between public and private vehicles, ownership and hire, delivery and transportation. But before they have any of those effects, they will hopefully save the lives of tens of thousands of people around the globe.
By the end of 2017, we’ll have a better idea of how this is going to shake out. This coming year will be a gamechanger for self-driving cars, with Tesla Motors ramping up its Autopilot programme and shipping the first of its Model 3 cars; Google potentially spinning out its own project into a stand-alone company; and the rapid proliferation of other organisations working in the same space, from Oxford University to San Franciscan startups.
The safety potential of self-driving cars took a knock in 2016, when Tesla Motors admitted to the first fatal crash involving the company’s Autopilot feature. Joshua Brown, who owned an Autopilot-enabled Tesla Model S, was killed when his car ploughed into the side of a truck. Brown’s death forced Tesla to re-emphasise that the Autopilot feature, as it currently exists, isn’t self-driving. Instead, it’s a driver-assist feature: it still requires a qualified driver to supervise and take over in the case of a mistake.
Some companies developing real self-driving technology disagree with this approach. For Google, whose X labs have been developing self-driving cars since 2012, there’s no point shipping such vehicles until they don’t need a driver at all.
But even a driver-assist feature may still end up saving huge numbers of lives. As of July, when Tesla went public about Brown’s death, a cumulative 130m miles had been driven with Autopilot turned on. Among normal American drivers, there’s a fatality roughly once every 94m miles. A robot doesn’t get drunk, distracted or drowsy and its reactions can be faster than are humanly possible.
The numbers carried on getting better and better for Tesla. Six months later, and hundreds of millions more miles have been driven with Autopilot turned on, yet no other confirmed fatality has been reported. A revolution has quietly begun. Alex Hern
• Where did it all go right? For a more positive view of the world in 2017, follow the Guardian’s Half Full online series, with reports on innovative ideas and solutions to the challenges of the day. Wishing you all a happier new year.
It wasn’t supposed to play out this way. At 5.05pm in Augusta, Georgia, on Sunday 10 April, there was no indication that it would. No Englishman had won the Masters, arguably golf’s most coveted individual event, since 1996. The American Jordan Spieth, who held a five-stroke lead, was in the midst of an extraordinary run, spanning 12 months. Step forward Danny Willett, who seized an opportunity in the most emphatic way.
Then 28, Willett had enjoyed a decent professional career without scaling great heights. The Yorkshireman had played in the Masters only once before, when he tied in 38th place out of 97. But as Spieth stumbled, it was Willett who breezed to the summit of the leaderboard, with a closing round of 67 that took the title by the relatively comfortable margin of three shots.
Just 12 days earlier, Willett’s wife had given birth to the couple’s first child, Zach. “I always said I wouldn’t come here if Zach wasn’t born by now,” Willett said. “Fortunately, he listened to my prayers and came early. It’s just been the most ridiculously awesome 12 days.” Ewan Murray
New rule: from 2017 onwards, no referendums. Because it always ends in misery. Brexit proved that, but the ballad of Boaty McBoatface proved it harder. The Natural Environment Research Council was about to unveil a new £200m polar research vessel, and asked the public to name it. The public – or at least the LOLsy, internet-dwelling slice of the population that Instagrams coffeeshop blackboards – decided to name it Boaty McBoatface. In the end, Boaty McBoatface gained 124,000 votes, four times as many as its nearest rival, and the vessel’s fate looked set.
But then it didn’t, because science minister Jo Johnson decided the whole thing was silly. He named it the RSS Sir David Attenborough, hoping that aligning the craft with our greatest national treasure would calm everyone down. When that didn’t work, he promised to name one of the ship’s remotely controlled submersibles Boaty McBoatface instead, but it was too little too late.
Still, this wasn’t the end. Boaty McBoatface is a folk hero now. He is Robin Hood. He is Wat Tyler. Whenever there’s an injustice in the world, we will point our ears towards the wind and hear the words “Boaty McBoatface”. Stuart Heritage
When the pope visited Lesbos in April, he returned with three families. At first they lived in a refuge run by the Sant’Egidio charity; now the three families have paperwork, a titolo di viaggio allowing free travel in Europe, and homes of their own. “It’s what I dreamed of,” says Nour Essa, 31, who lives with her husband Hasan and son Riad in a two-room flat in Rome’s city centre. Bringing up a two-year-old in shared quarters had been a strain, and made Nour feel she couldn’t parent as she chose. Today, Riad attends nursery and is starting to talk. “We speak only Arabic to him,” Nour says. “He replies to us only in Italian.” A new life comes more easily to children.
Are they happier now? “We are better, but we feel homeless,” Nour says. “Your studies, all your efforts, are thrown away because you must initiate a new life. You are like a child.” She studied microbiology for five years in Damascus and two years postgraduate in France; in Italy she must start again from the third year of an undergraduate degree. Hasan, a garden designer, must study architecture before he can practise in Italy; he attends university in Rome.
The second family, Suhila Ayiad and Ramy Alshakarji, live alongside a community of nuns. Suhila is learning Italian; their 16-year-old son thrives and wants to study dentistry, while their 18-year-old is “living the teenage years he couldn’t live in Syria”, a Sant’Egidio spokesperson says diplomatically. Little Quds, Ramy and Suhila’s youngest, is at school.
The third family, Osama Qawqaji and Wafa Eid, live a long way south of the charity’s language school. If they integrate, it will be through their children, the spokesperson says. “Probably they are planning to go back to Syria when they can.” Paula Cocozza
To the terrible date of 15 April 1989, when 96 people died and hundreds more were injured and traumatised at an FA Cup semi-final, the bereaved Hillsborough families finally succeeded in adding 26 April 2016 as a historic landmark: the day the truth about the disaster was finally, legally established. Fully 27 years from the day their loved ones died, they crowded into the converted courtroom on a Warrington business park, all that suffering compressed into an awful wait for a jury to answer yes, or no, to 14 questions.
Questions six and seven were the heart of the matter, deciders in the families’ and survivors’ implacable struggle against the lies of South Yorkshire police, whose officers had organised a campaign to blame the victims, even as people were dying at the football ground. In 1991, South Yorkshire police made that case relentlessly at the first inquest, claiming the people who had paid to attend the event in an expectation of safety had drunk too much and somehow been recklessly too eager to watch the match. The families had to pay for their own legal representation; they could collectively afford £142,000 for a single barrister, pitted against the battery of publicly funded police lawyers, and the jury verdict was accidental death. This time, Theresa May’s Home Office provided funding for two rows of forensic and persistently combative lawyers to oppose the same allegations made again by the police.
This adversarial rerun of the old, already discredited police stories stretched the new inquests to two years, the longest case ever heard by a jury in British history. It had been agony for the families, forced to revisit every detail of the day their lives were devastated.
Finally, verdict day arrived. The forewoman of the jury answered questions one to five as expected, agreeing that there were appalling safety deficiencies in Sheffield Wednesday’s squalid Leppings Lane away end. Then came question six: were the 96 people unlawfully killed due to criminal gross negligence by the police officer in charge, Ch Supt David Duckenfield? “Yes,” the forewoman agreed, calmly, and the families’ years of struggle came to be vindicated. Next, question seven, key to whether this day would deliver justice or be another terrible chapter: did the behaviour of Liverpool supporters contribute to the dangerous situation? “No,” the forewoman said, with a kind note in her voice. The reaction was a gleeful outpouring of relief. People cheered, wept, hugged each other. For so many bleak years, this had been unthinkable, and now it really had come to pass: the lies had been overhauled by the truth.Outside, blinking, disbelieving, with film crews and photographers in front of them, a group of family members instinctively started to sing the Liverpool club anthem, You’ll Never Walk Alone. Ian Burke was 17 when his father, Henry, a builder, was among the 96 who died so needlessly, leaving bereft another son, daughter and a grief-stricken wife. Ian had taken time off work to sit through almost every day of the inquests; quiet, racked with stress. Just days before the verdicts, aged only 44, he had a heart attack.He is still suffering heart-related health problems, yet look at the film or photographs of the group outside the court on 26 April 2016, and there he is in the middle, with his suit and tie on, arm aloft, singing the beloved song, and smiling. David Conn
You wouldn’t have dared suggest it as a Hollywood script: too unlikely. The unfashionable football, a toe-poke from relegation the previous season, 5,000-1 outsiders to win it this time round, goes on to beat the moneyed glory boys to the Premier League title. Impossible. You’d have got better odds on Piers Morgan being named Arsenal manager (2,500-1, since you asked). Yet it did happen. Leicester City’s the name, romance is the game.
And not just any old romance. Romance in the most cynical, spendthrift league in the world, where Manchester City regularly spend £40m on defenders who can’t defend, Manchester United sell Paul Pogba for nothing (and later resign him for £89m without a blink), and Chelsea sack two managers a week for fun. And here was little Leicester City, a raggle-taggle army of rejects, has-beens and unknowns, managed by an elderly Italian nicknamed the Tinkerman because he was so indecisive, winning the league title.
They didn’t even inch their way to the premiership, they blew their rivals away, winning 23 games, losing only three and finishing 10 points clear of their closest rivals, Arsenal. Jamie Vardy, who had been playing non-league football for Fleetwood Town three years earlier, scored 24 goals and won a place in the England team; little known Riyad Mahrez won player of the year; thirtysomething has-been Robert Huth (long since rejected by Chelsea) forged a mighty partnership with thirtysomething never-been Wes Morgan (who had spent 10 years at Nottingham Forest and ran tattoo parlours on the side).
To say Leicester were penniless is untrue; all Premier League teams have money. But to put it in context, their squad cost £52.8m, just over one 10th of Manchester City’s.
After Christmas 2015, the impossible became ever more probable. By March, it was a likelihood, by April an inevitability, and on 2 May they were crowned champions. The city was painted blue: foreign film crews embedded themselves in the East Midlands and taught themselves how to pronounce Leicester; literary bigwigs such as Julian Barnes waxed poetic about their favourite club; and Gary Lineker promised to present Match Of The Day in his smalls (he did).
Order has been restored since those heady days. As I write, Leicester (with virtually the same team) are 14th in the league, four points off the relegation zone, with three wins and seven defeats. But it was wonderful while it lasted. Simon Hattenstone
“This is our Obama moment,” said Aisha from Tooting the day after the capital elected Sadiq Khan as mayor. For many other Londoners, it was the triumph of hope over fear, following an ugly campaign waged by Khan’s chief rival, Zac Goldsmith.
In a year characterised by the electoral gains of people and parties associated with the right, racism, xenophobia and nationalism, Khan’s decisive victory in May was a sweet, bright moment for those on the flipside of an increasingly binary political landscape. The contest was principally between Khan, the Muslim son of a bus driver and seamstress who grew up on a council estate with seven siblings, and Goldsmith, the son of a billionaire businessman and Eton alumnus.
On the advice of Conservative strategists, Goldsmith sought to portray Khan as a friend of Islamic extremists. The Tory candidate said Khan had “given platforms and oxygen and cover and excuses” to extremists. “London would be safer if I’m mayor,” he told voters.
Khan, meanwhile, celebrated the capital’s diversity. “I am a Londoner, I am European, I am British, I am English, I am of Islamic faith, of Asian origin, of Pakistani heritage, a dad, a husband,” he told voters, adding: “We do not just tolerate each other in London; we respect each other.”
When the votes were counted, Khan had the support of 57% of Londoners, compared with 43% who voted for Goldsmith. With around 1.3m votes, Khan also had the biggest personal mandate of any politician in UK history. Harriet Sherwood
At 10pm on a Sunday in May, Jacob Husley was setting up at London nightclub Fabric for his weekly house and techno night WetYourSelf! when he passed an elderly couple on the stairs: “They were walking down slowly and she was on crutches. I asked, ‘Are you OK?’ but they just smiled and kept going.” Husley, 36, who has DJed at Fabric for eight years, checked with security, who said the couple had turned up with tickets.
Husley went back in to find them at the bar. They were Polish and didn’t speak English. “I wanted to offer them a drink,” he says. “They had tequila shots and I thought, ‘This couple are wicked!’ But I still had a feeling there was a mistake.”
As the club filled up, Husley took them to the VIP lounge and when a Polish friend arrived, he had him translate. “They said they’d always dreamed of going to one of the big, great nightclubs in London.” They’d bought tickets online in Poland and were staying with their niece in London. Husley offered them another drink and when they asked for tea, fetched some from a cafe down the street.
Other guests embraced the first-time visitors. “They didn’t stay in the VIP area. He kept venturing out to the dancefloor and everyone was giving him lots of attention. She sat by the bar and couldn’t dance, but people were saying hello. They definitely enjoyed themselves.” At 5am, they took Husley up on his offer of a taxi home.
The next day, Husley put a photo of the couple on Facebook. It went viral. “I think it inspired people,” he says. “They posted to their friends, ‘This is us when we’re old.’” The story got international coverage, but Husley didn’t know the couple’s names and had no way of contacting them.
Then, a few weeks later, he received a letter from pensioners Wladyslaw Nykiel, 82, and Stanislawa Zapasnik, 79. Nykiel wrote: “We had a wonderful time dancing with young Londoners who welcomed us very warmly. There are no words to describe the atmosphere and great fun [of Fabric].”
When Islington council closed Fabric in September, Husley got back in touch. Nykiel sent a picture of him and Zapasnik holding a #savefabric placard. Fabric will now reopen on 6 January – and Husley has made sure the couple have tickets. Candice Pires
Two years ago, most of England was asleep, something that hit me every time I travelled there from Scotland. In the summer of 2014, people north of the border were in the midst of their referendum, and life was full of talk about what was at stake. I’d immerse myself in the hurly-burly, then fly home to a country that felt sedated, where politicians still spoke in lukewarm platitudes.
Now look. In the wake of the EU referendum, politics in England and Wales is crackling with life. I travel around the country for the Guardian, and getting people to talk used to be like pulling teeth. Now, I mention the EU, Theresa May or Trump and off the conversation goes: people are awake.
This is not all on the pro-Brexit side, by any means. Remainers are starting to find their voices, too. New cross-party “progressive” groups have sprung up in Brighton, London and East Anglia, set on opposing the vision shared by the Tories and Ukip. In November, the Green party had the sense to stand down in the Richmond Park byelection, with the aim of kicking out the pro-Brexit Tory “independent” Zac Goldsmith, thereby playing its part in his defeat.
A new group, More United, is raising money for candidates from “the progressive centre”, pledged to a pro-European, egalitarian future. Meanwhile, the pressure group Compass, which began inside the Labour party, then reached beyond it, is to start making the case against old-fashioned party divides and in favour of what it calls progressive alliances. As well as the Greens’ co-leader Caroline Lucas, a handful of the most forward-thinking Labour MPs are giving it quiet support.
If the next few years are going to see a big thrashing out of what England is, the process will not be the preserve of the right. Old politics (the endless talk of “hard-working families”, “going forward” and the rest) is pretty much finished. That’s a good thing. And if what has replaced it is proving visceral and primary-coloured, there are voices on the left who can meet that challenge. Of course it will be difficult; the word “struggle” is part of the progressive vocabulary for a reason. But isn’t it better to be awake than complacently snoozing? John Harris
On 15 January, Peake performed the first British spacewalk outside the International Space Station, an event that took a dramatic turn when his colleague Tim Kopra’s helmet began to fill with water. Peake had to take the lead and bring the other astronaut back to safety from the outer panels of the space station. He did this with the calmness they seem to breed in the bones of astronauts; they appear to be chosen these days not just for their ability to perform in ludicrously demanding environments, but to smile and enthusiastically explain things to awestruck children while doing it.
For six months, until he came back down to Earth in June, Peake did just that, his heavily scheduled days split between experiments and outreach. He sent videos to schools; ran a London Marathon in orbit; he got people in Britain excited.
And that, in the end, was the point. Peake was not the first British astronaut in space; that honour belongs to Helen Sharman, who spent a week on the Mir space station in 1991, and there have been five Britons on space shuttle missions (though they had to take US citizenship). But Peake was the first astronaut whose trip was directly funded by the British government, through the European Space Agency. Where our financial commitment to a pan-European body lies now, post-Brexit, remains to be seen. But for a few months there was a man from Chichester in space, and you just ask a nearby eight-year-old how cool that is. Dara Ó Briain
As the world contemplates the calamitous prospect of Donald Trump unravelling the landmark Paris climate agreement, we should take comfort in the fact that another international accord has begun remedying one of our biggest environmental messes.
Scientists reported this year that the ozone hole above Antarctica, ripped open by our use of a group of chemical compounds, has started healing – good news that is the fruit of the 1987 Montreal Protocol. This was when countries agreed the deal to first freeze and later phase out chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), mostly in aerosols and refrigeration. Because the ozone layer protects us from ultraviolet light, the UN estimates the CFC phase-out has avoided 2m annual cases of skin cancer.
The hole has not vanished: it still opens from September to November, only more slowly. Experts believe there is still a way to go. But “by 2060 you’ll have almost no years with an ozone hole”, said Susan Solomon, who led the study published in Science magazine. “Maybe one in every 15 years, but it won’t be every year – bang, bang, bang – like it has been since the mid-80s.”
For Solomon, the healing of the hole is proof that the world can come together to tackle big environmental problems. “We made a mistake, and countries were willing to put their shoulders to the wheel and figure out how to fix it, and we did.”
The Montreal Protocol did have unintended consequences: the hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) that largely replaced CFCs contribute to climate change, too. In October, 170 countries met in Uganda and reached a deal to fix that. Under the Kigali amendment to the Montreal Protocol, HFCs will also ultimately be phased out, which some estimates say could avoid up to 0.5C of global warming. US secretary of state John Kerry hailed the deal as “a monumental step forward”. Adam Vaughan
• Where did it all go right? For a more positive view of the world in 2017, follow the Guardian’s Half Full online series, with reports on innovative ideas and solutions to the challenges of the day. Wishing you all a happier new year.
Barbara Millicent Roberts has a distinctive look. The doll, better known as Barbie, was in 1959 either blond or brunette, before ditching her dark locks for a long, impossibly sleek golden mane. But even in the early days, Barbie was notable for her lithe limbs, large-yet-pert breasts and, of course, teeny-tiny waist.
Facially, her evolution has been almost constant: 1969’s eyeliner flicks and pixie nose meant Barbie looked like Bewitched’s Samantha. By the late 70s, she was bearing bright white teeth and in the late 80s/early 90s her already big pupils almost doubled in size; who knows why.
Figure-wise, however, little has changed. In 1998, Mattel gave its latest doll, Really Rad Barbie, slimmer hips, a wider waistline and smaller bust, so Barbie would “have more of a teenage physique”. And in 2000 she acquired a tummy button. Progress, it’s fair to say, has been slow.
But there is hope: in 2016, Mattel acknowledged its “responsibility to girls and parents to reflect a broader view of beauty” and gave Barbie a full-on reinvention. Jawlines were softened, thighs thickened, skin tones lightened and darkened. The Fashionistas range included three new body shapes (tall, curvy, petite), seven skin tones, 22 eye colours, 24 hairstyles and 14 “face sculpts”.
It’s easy to be cynical – diversity is good for business – and it may be some time before children choose to play with anything other than the white, blond, skinny doll that has epitomised western beauty ideals for so long. But when they do, at least there’s a taller-than-average, possibly mixed-race Barbie with a supercool undercut just waiting to steal the show. Leah Harper
In a year that saw America pass on the chance to elect its first female president, there was better news from Taiwan: Tsai Ing-wen rose to power as one of the rare self-made female Asian leaders to have succeeded through hard work rather than family connections. In January, she was elected Taiwan’s first female president, becoming the most powerful woman in the Chinese-speaking world.
Her Democratic Progressive party’s landslide win was boosted by young voters disillusioned with stagnant economic growth and rising inequality, and desperate to assert their country’s identity. Taiwan, an island of 23 million people about 100 miles off the Chinese coast, has its own government, currency and military, but is viewed by China as a renegade province. Most nations, wary of offending China, refuse to have formal diplomatic ties with it. However, US president-elect Donald Trump spoke with Tsai on the telephone in December, breaking decades of US foreign policy protocol.
Tsai, a law professor and LSE graduate, came to power on the back of the Sunflower Movement of 2014, when students occupied government buildings and thousands took to the streets to protest at a trade deal with Beijing.
It has, however, seen China retaliate by freezing diplomatic ties and allegedly restricting tourism to squeeze Taiwan’s struggling economy. And as Tsai has walked the tricky line between public expectations on independence and increased jobs and prosperity, her approval rating has plummeted. But the president, who has been called the “Angela Merkel of the east” for her calm, academic style, appears unfazed. “We want to make Taiwan an Asian tiger once again,” she wrote in the Economist in November. “My plan for 2017 is for Taiwan to renew its role as a pioneer.” Nicola Smith
The first week of 2016 seems like an entirely different place. For proof, look at #DrummondPuddleWatch: a livestream of a large puddle in Newcastle. If this happened now, we would treat it differently. We’d gnash our teeth about failing infrastructures, joylessly share overcooked thinkpieces about how the puddle was Brexit’s fault, brace ourselves for the inevitable moment when president-elect Trump would call the puddle “sad” on Twitter.
But back in the glory days of early January, #DrummondPuddleWatch was a treat: a dog in the playground, the first glimpse of snow. There was real pleasure to be taken from the various ways people attempted to traverse the puddle: on tiptoe, via an island-hopping technique using a nearby lamp-post, or smashing through regardless. It was the most basic personality test, dividing people into varying layers of caution; at once breathtakingly mundane and staggeringly life-affirming. It felt spectacularly British then, and it feels spectacularly innocent now.
At its peak, around 20,000 people were watching the puddle online. Before long, people brought lilos and surfboards with them. A crowd formed. Around a puddle. It felt like a moment in time, shared by all. One day, we’ll sit our grandchildren down and tell them about the time 20,000 people watched an old lady leapfrog a puddle, and they won’t believe us. “What’s a puddle?” they’ll ask through a gas mask in the concrete bunker they’ve never left, and we’ll be lost for words. Stuart Heritage
When Virginia McLaurin, aged 106, attended a White House reception in February, she wasn’t sure if she would meet President Obama. “We were waiting and I kept asking, ‘Where is he? Am I going to see him?’” she says, speaking from her home in Washington DC earlier this month, apologising for being hard of hearing.
McLaurin, born in 1909, grew up on a sharecropping farm in South Carolina. She was used to one entrance for white people at the front of a house and another at the back for black people. “I didn’t think I’d ever live to see a black president,” she says. “And I really didn’t think a poor person like me would get a chance to go to the White House.”
McLaurin, known locally as Ms V, is an active community member: she still volunteers up to 40 hours a week at a special needs school and Sundays are for church. When she said she wanted to meet the Obamas, a neighbour contacted White House staff and she was invited to a Black History Month event.
“When I got close to him, I was so excited, I just grabbed him,” she says. Video footage shows McLaurin, in a matching blue jacket and skirt, throwing her arms open, shouting, “Hi!” and clasping hands with Obama. “I grabbed her, too,” she says of the first lady.
In the video, the president jokes that McLaurin should slow down; Michelle Obama says, “I want to be like you when I grow up.” When McLaurin replies, “You can” and wiggles her shoulders with excitement, the three are led in some dance steps by Michelle.
As they gather for a photograph, the first lady exclaims, “Look at those nails!” McLaurin recalls they were the same blue as her suit and that her “fiftysomething” granddaughter had painted them. “You’ll notice I had on boots. That was because I didn’t have any shoes. But I thought, ‘I don’t care, I’m going anyhow.’”
When the video went viral, people heard of McLaurin’s volunteering and poor living conditions, and she received donations to a Facebook page set up by her neighbour. She was able to move into a more comfortable apartment in April, a few weeks after turning 107. “Everywhere I go, people hug and kiss me and want my picture,” she says. “All my joy came out when I met the president. It meant so much to me.” Candice Pires
Paul Trueman has been a fan of The Archers for more than a decade, but at the start of this year, like millions of other devotees of the long-running Radio 4 soap, he found himself seized by one particular storyline.
Helen Titchener, born a member of the titular farming family, now married to a manipulative bully named Rob, was being dragged ever more under his abusive control. Friends started spotting bruises. Now she was pregnant, and increasingly fearful for her young son.
Among the soap’s devoted fans on Twitter, Trueman noted, “There was a lot of, ‘Why can’t we do something? This is awful.’ Then an idea popped into my head. If she were real, we could fundraise to get her out of there. So I thought, that’s what we should do. We should start a fundraising page for a fictional character” – with the profits going to help real-life victims of domestic violence.
Within a couple of hours, Trueman had set up a page on the JustGiving website in aid of the charity Refuge, with a nominal target of £1,000. “I thought if we were lucky we might reach that in a month.”
That was around 9pm. His phone pinged five minutes later, the first alert that someone had donated money. By midnight, he had passed his target. “And my phone didn’t stop pinging for the next six months. It was bonkers.” He didn’t turn off the notifications, “partly because I loved getting them. It was just fantastic, a little bit of a drug.”
Within 48 hours, the total passed £20,000; it was £45,000 by the end of the first week. Most powerful, for Trueman, were the comments from those donating, many anonymous.
“To the charity that saved me and my children, eternal thanks.”
“I was a Helen. I came out the other side. There’s a light there at the end of the tunnel.”
Ten months after Trueman’s bright idea – and aided, he stresses, by many, many others – the site has raised more than £200,000 (including gift aid) for Refuge. It’s still open for donations. “Never before in my 33-year career at Refuge have I seen such public support for our work,” says Sandra Horley, the charity’s chief executive. “It has been incredible to see this storyline, and one Archers fan from Devon, inspire so many members of the public to engage with something that goes on behind closed doors.”
“2016 has sucked, don’t get me wrong,” Trueman says. “But I am quietly proud of the fact that, as a community, Archers listeners have been responsible for one of the bright sparks of the year.” Esther Addley
It’s long been the case that women pay more than men for virtually identical products such as plastic razors and face creams (typically branded pink for ladies, black or blue for men).
In February, Boots bowed to consumer pressure over “sexist pricing” of products by changing the cost of its razors and eye creams. The high street giant made the pledge after a change.org petition set up by campaigner Stevie Wise highlighted the disparity between equivalent products marketed at men and women. Since then, Boots has brought its No7 skincare range into line, ensuring products are sold for the same price across male and female ranges.
Superdrug has also reviewed the pricing disparity and cut prices of its own-brand razors, adding that it is challenging suppliers that charge more for women’s products. Argos, which came under fire after selling pink scooters for £5 more than the same blue ones, claimed the discrepancy was an error that had been corrected. However, in September, the gender equality group Fawcett found in an analysis of supermarket own-brand toiletries (at Tesco, Asda, Sainsbury’s and Morrisons) that women are paying on average 31% more than men for a basket of comparable toiletries. Fawcett intends to keep up the pressure. Rebecca Smithers
The Office for National Statistics published official figures that confirmed a staggering 51% drop in the rate of pregnancy among under-18s in less than two decades. It is now at its lowest level since records began in the late 1960s: in 1998, in England and Wales, 47 out of every 1,000 young women under 18 became pregnant; by 2014 (the figures published this year), that had plummeted to 23 out of every 1,000. The World Health Organisation is exploring how this turnaround was achieved and whether it can be replicated elsewhere.
The key engine driving such dramatic change was an ambitious policy known as the teenage pregnancy strategy, launched by the Labour government in 1999. It was a 10-year project, almost unheard of in quick-fix government circles, with work carried out in schools and colleges, among youth and social workers.
Teenage conception rates have also dropped worldwide, for similar reasons, including more widely available, high-quality sex education, and greater access to more effective contraception. Another theory is the advent of social media - youngsters are busy networking at home via Facebook and Instagram rather than meeting face-to-face over a six-pack of lager. Sally Weale
With spring came the story of Atlas, the giant bunny who was given a new home following a nationwide charity appeal by the Scottish SPCA. Atlas was a then seven-month-old continental giant rabbit, and about the size of a west highland terrier (too large for his previous owner). His new owner, Jen Hislop, 43, from North Ayrshire, was chosen from hundreds of applicants around the world who hoped to adopt the rabbit.
“I burst into tears when I got the phone call saying I had been chosen to rehome Atlas,” said Hislop, who renamed him Attila The Bun Binky Master Jazz Paws – Atty, for short – and who was provided with a buggy to help get him around.
The continental giant is one of the largest and oldest breeds of rabbits, and can grow to 1.2m long, weigh more than 20kg, and eat a bale of hay a week as well as up to 2,000 carrots and 700 apples a year. Nadia Khomami
• Where did it all go right? For a more positive view of the world in 2017, follow the Guardian’s Half Full online series, with reports on innovative ideas and solutions to the challenges of the day. Wishing you all a happier new year.
Even people who love new recipe ideas hit saturation point at some time in the year. And that’s usually about now. We spend the weeks leading up to Christmas entertaining all the different possibilities being shared left, right and centre, and then, right at the last minute, remember that the traditional festive meal is nothing more than a big roast dinner with all sorts of tasty trimmings. That’s when we realise that Christmas will still happen even if we don’t transform into an entirely different cook from the one we are the rest of the year.
When you put on your apron to get ready for tomorrow’s main event, don’t forget that everyone prefers a regular meal and a chilled-out host to some elaborate feast and a stressed-out cook. If you cook what you love to eat and eat what you love to cook, your day will be a happy one. It’s this way of thinking that informs so much of what I cook, eat and share with family and friends all year round. It’s also why I’m as likely to be slurping on a bowl of noodles on Boxing Day as tucking into yet another turkey sandwich or chunk of stilton. Today’s recipes are all about the ingredients I’ll be craving over the next week.
I’ll happily eat this at any time of day, and especially for a late weekend breakfast. You can get green tea soba noodles from large supermarkets and Asian food stores; regular soba noodles, which are even more widely available, are a good alternative.
For the perfect boiled egg, with a firm white and runny yolk, bring a medium pot of water to a boil on a high heat. Carefully lower in four room-temperature eggs (if your eggs are fridge-cold, they’ll take longer to cook) and leave to bubble away for six minutes. Lift out the eggs and transfer to a bowl in the sink and leave under cold running water for a minute or two, to halt the cooking process. Just before serving, peel off the shell and cut or tear the egg in half. Serves four.
200g green tea soba noodles (or regular soba)
30g basil leaves, picked and roughly chopped
30g coriander leaves, picked and roughly chopped
70g pistachio kernels, lightly toasted and roughly chopped
½ tsp ground cardamom
3 limes – finely grate one (to get ½ tsp zest), squeeze another (to get 3 tbsp juice) and cut the third into quarters
3 tbsp groundnut oil
1 small garlic clove, peeled and crushed
1 green chilli, deseeded and finely chopped
Salt 
2 ripe avocados, cut into 0.5cm slices
4 eggs, soft-boiled (see introduction)
¼ tsp nigella seeds
Cook the noodles according to the instructions on the packet (cooking times vary from brand to brand), then refresh under cold water and transfer to a colander to drain.
Put the basil, coriander, pistachios, cardamom, lime zest, lime juice, oil, garlic, chilli and half a teaspoon of salt in a large bowl. Mix to combine, then add the noodles and divide between four bowls. Arrange the avocado slices on top of each serving, and top with two egg halves (peel and cut them just before serving). Finish with a sprinkle of nigella seeds, and serve each portion with a wedge of lime.
It’s easy to get stuck in our ways with apples. A granny smith is sweet and tart enough to work here, but why not try something new for a change? My local grocer, Parkway Greens in Camden, gets some of its apples from Brogdale in Kent, home of the National Fruit Collection, and I recently munched my way through eight varieties I’d never tried before. They were as delicious and different from each other as bottles in a mixed case of wine. Serves six to eight.
60ml cider vinegar
30g caster sugar
1 small red onion, peeled and finely sliced 
5cm piece ginger, peeled and julienned
150g flat rice noodles, broken into roughly 15cm pieces
3 tbsp olive oil
200g frozen edamame, quickly blanched, drained and dried
1 sweet, sharp apple, cored and cut into 2mm-thick wedges
2 large 400g cucumbers, cut in half lengthways, seeds scooped out and flesh cut into long, thin strips 
2 red chillies, deseeded and julienned
10g mint leaves, roughly shredded
10g tarragon leaves, roughly chopped
1 tbsp poppy seeds
Salt and black pepper
Put the vinegar, sugar and 60ml water in a small saucepan on a high heat. Bring to a boil, stir until the sugar has dissolved, then cook for two minutes, until the liquid has reduced by a third. Put the onion and ginger in a small bowl, pour over the hot liquid and set aside for an hour, until the vegetables have softened.
Put the noodles in a large bowl and pour over enough boiling water to cover. Set aside for 10-15 minutes, until the noodles are soft, then drain and put in a large bowl. Toss with a tablespoon of oil and leave to cool.
Add all the other ingredients to the noodles, including the pickled onion and ginger, and their pickling juices, and season with a teaspoon and a half of salt and plenty of black pepper. Toss and serve at once.
Lots of alternatives here, if you want: use regular basil if you can’t find Thai basil (although a lot of supermarkets do sell it) and if you can’t get hold of a green mango, use a regular mango instead. You don’t want it too ripe and sweet, though – green mangoes have a welcome tartness – and you might want to reduce the sugar in the dressing down to 20 grams. The black noodles look great against the salmon but, again, these can be replaced with whatever you can find: udon and soba both work well as substitutes. If you have a mandolin, then now is the time to use it for the vegetables. If you don’t, keep a lookout in the post-Christmas sales. Serves four.
3 tbsp rice vinegar
30g caster sugar
¼ tsp chilli flakes
1 tsp sesame oil
1 tbsp soy sauce
¾ tsp fish sauce
4 salmon fillets (about 130g each), skin on and boneless
For the salad
85g black rice noodles (or soba, udon, etc, if you can’t find black ones)
2 large carrots, peeled and julienned
4cm piece ginger, peeled and julienned
150g beansprouts
2 small shallots, peeled and finely sliced
1 green mango (or a not-too-ripe regular mango), peeled, stoned, and flesh cut into julienne strips 
10g Thai basil leaves
10g mint leaves
10g coriander leaves
2 tbsp toasted sesame seeds (white and black, ideally), plus 2 tsp extra, to serve
For the dressing
2 tbsp groundnut oil
3 tbsp lime juice, plus 1 lime, quartered, to serve
1 tbsp mirin
Salt
Put the vinegar and sugar in a small saucepan on a high heat. Stir until the sugar dissolves, then leave to boil for two minutes, until you’re left with a thick syrup. Take off the heat and stir in the chilli, half a teaspoon of sesame oil, and the soy and fish sauces. Put the salmon fillets in a bowl and pour this mixture all over them, then add an eighth of a teaspoon of salt, turn to coat the fish and leave to marinate for 10 minutes.
Mix all the dressing ingredients with the remaining half-teaspoon of sesame oil and a teaspoon of salt, and put to one side.
Heat the oven to 220C/425F/gas mark 7. Half-fill a medium saucepan with water, bring to a boil, then cook the noodles for four to five minutes (or according to the instructions). Drain, refresh under cold water to stop the noodles cooking more, drain again and put in a large bowl with the other salad ingredients.
Put the salmon fillets skin side down in a small baking dish (about 20cm x 30cm), so they fit snugly, pour over the marinade and roast for 12 minutes, basting the fish twice, until caramelised and cooked, but still a little pink in the middle. Remove and keep warm.
Just before serving, pour the dressing over the salad and toss. Divide between four shallow bowls and top each serving with a warm salmon fillet, skin side down, and a drizzle of the cooking juices. Sprinkle with the remaining sesame seeds and serve with a lime wedge.
• Yotam Ottolenghi is chef/patron of Ottolenghi and Nopi in London.
Finding the good news stories in a year in which the grim reaper more than overstayed his welcome in arts circles might seem like an unenviable task: 2016 did, after all, rob us of Victoria Wood, Leonard Cohen, Alan Rickman, Caroline Aherne, Ronnie Corbett, Harper Lee, Gene Wilder, Terry Wogan, Zaha Hadid, George Martin, and many more. There were also various puzzling new cultural dilemmas: how, for instance, could we appreciate a Solange Knowles album (A Seat At The Table) interspersed with her father’s recollections of the Ku Klux Klan, when a KKK-backed candidate was soon to be installed in the White House? Was it possible to enjoy a baby ibex prancing up and down a mountain, as we witnessed in Planet Earth II, without fretting over the forecasts of impending ecological doom?
But culture is never more vital than during times of turbulence, whether acting as a shoulder to cry on, a rallying voice of dissent, or simply a form of blissful escapism.
So while the Tories heaped misery on society’s poorest, artists spoke up: Ken Loach’s I, Daniel Blake became the surprise winner of the Palme d’Or at Cannes, thanks to its revealing portrait of a man trapped in Britain’s Kafka-esque benefits system. Likewise the Brexit vote and its terrifying fallout informed Ali Smith’s swiftly written novel Autumn, which portrayed a country divided and opened with the cheery line: “It was the worst of times, it was the worst of times.” Tunbridge Wells punk duo Slaves surely cast a knowing glance at the Leave mantra with their Take Control album, and the short, snotty blasts of noise called Lies, or Rich Man, contained within. Brexit trod the boards, too: James Graham’s play A Strong Exit was written exclusively for the Guardian, while performance artist Scottee’s Putting Words In Your Mouth involved actors lip-synching to real interviews with LGBT people: just how tolerant would Brexit Britain be, it asked.
Fears over climate change produced thoughtful and moving responses: Nottingham artist Wolfgang Buttress created a meditative drone symphony using the collective buzz from 40,000 bees; he would later perform it live from within a giant metal beehive he erected in Kew Gardens. Elsewhere, statements in the art world were notable beyond the art itself: Helen Marten won the Turner prize and the Hepworth prize for sculpture this year, and announced she would be sharing the prize money for both with her fellow nominees. Human rights lawyer Philippe Sands and author of East West Street also displayed generosity of spirit, giving his £30,000 Baillie Gifford prize money to charity.
As identity politics became the new battleground for culture wars across the Atlantic, that, too, spawned bold artistic statements: Paul Beatty became the first US winner of the Man Booker prize with The Sellout, which managed to somehow find humour in the notion of reinstating slavery, and got the acclaim it deserved after battling multiple rejection letters. Barry Jenkins’ Moonlight, released in the US last year and out in the UK in February, shone a moving light on the joy and sadness within gay black lives. And Transparent, the hit HBO comedy, continued to clean up at the Emmys: its creator Jill Soloway used her winner’s speech to thank the trans community who inspired the show, before declaring: “Topple the patriarchy!”
In pop, movements such as Black Lives Matter were swept up into the US mainstream: Beyoncé’s chart-topping Lemonade was unafraid to sample Malcolm X, or feature the mothers of Trayvon Martin and Michael Brown in her visual album concept. She was just one of several major black pop artists in the midst of a creative renaissance, each one pushing the boundaries of genre and ripping up expectations: Kanye West, Rihanna, Blood Orange and Frank Ocean all made dazzling musical statements, the latter’s stunning Blonde a fuzzy meditation on youth, drugs and relationships that eschewed explicit slogans yet seemed political just in its existence.
Elsewhere, British TV thrived thanks to serious drama such as War And Peace, The Crown, The Night Manager and National Treasure, which dared to examine the sexual abuse scandals that rocked the nation in the wake of Savile. Even if 2016 didn’t feel like a year in which there was much to joke about, there was plenty to make you laugh: UK comedy found humour in the bleakness of the everyday, with sadcoms such as Phoebe Waller-Bridge’s Fleabag, or stresscoms such as Motherland, which starred Anna Maxwell Martin as a not-quite-coping mum drinking Jacob’s Creek for breakfast.
So there was plenty of good news, even if much of it was good news arising from bad news. You only needed to look at this year’s Glastonbury to see how the two could interact: on paper, a bill featuring headline slots for Coldplay and Adele was not one to get the pulse racing. Yet staged in the immediate aftermath of the Brexit vote, both sets felt oddly fitting: Adele’s nervous, chatterbox routine mirrored many people’s own anxieties, and was as reassuring as a daft pub chat with your best mate. Nor was 2016 the year cynically to bemoan Chris Martin et al’s comfort-blanket tendencies: how could you, when a comfort blanket was what people were crying out for?
• Where did it all go right? For a more positive view of the world in 2017, follow the Guardian’s Half Full online series, with reports on innovative ideas and solutions to the challenges of the day. Wishing you all a happier new year.
It came from beyond the Large Magellanic Cloud. The signal, a mere 20 milliseconds long, captured the moment when two black holes slammed together – a cataclysm that sent ripples through spacetime and onwards to Earth, where they made instruments chirp and scientists cheer. “We have detected gravitational waves,” said David Reitze of the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (Ligo). “We did it.”
The announcement ranked as the physics discovery of the year, confirming Einstein’s century-old theory of gravity and putting the Ligo team on course for a Nobel. But the real excitement is yet to come. For the first quarter of a million years, the cosmos was hidden from astronomers. Now scientists can build gravitational wave observatories and, with them, look back to the birth of the universe. We can study the moment of creation.
It wasn’t the only time astronomers celebrated in 2016. In August, the European Southern Observatory in the Chilean desert saw changes in the light coming from Proxima Centauri, the star nearest to the sun. An Earth-sized planet was pulling the red dwarf around. What thrilled astronomers was that the newly discovered world lay in the star’s habitable zone, that Goldilocks region of space where the temperature is right for liquid water, and along with water, perhaps life. The discovery brought the question, “Are we alone?” to our cosmic doorstep – and with it the realisation that such planets are not rare.
Stephen Hawking is convinced that aliens are out there, but he’s wary of inviting them over. In his 2016 film, Stephen Hawking’s Favourite Places, he warned that meeting up with a technologically advanced bunch of cosmic hooligans might do for humanity what Christopher Columbus did for the Native Americans.
Hawking is equally suspicious of artificial intelligence. Yes, superintelligent machines might solve our greatest challenges, but not if they wipe us out instead. Fortunately, that threat remains a distant one.
For some people, merging with robots makes sense. Nathan Copeland, a 28-year-old who broke his neck in a car crash, had a robot arm wired directly into his brain. He could move it by thinking, and through signals passed back to his brain, experience a sense of touch. By providing sensory feedback, researchers are edging towards their ultimate goal: robotic limbs that move and feel like real ones.
More than 25 US states have now legalised marijuana for medical uses, but could magic mushrooms be next? A handful of small studies found that psilocybin (the ingredient that made for happy hippies in the 1970s) could lift severe depression in one group of volunteers, and reduce anxiety and depression in cancer patients. For Stephen Ross, director of addiction psychiatry at NYU Langone Medical Center, the latter results were unprecedented. “We don’t have anything like it,” he said.
“More work needed” was the take home from another trial in 2016; this time for a male contraceptive. At last it seemed that men could shoulder the responsibility for birth control, and all it required was, well, a little prick. The bimonthly hormone jab was nearly as effective as the female pill, but the trial was halted after 20 men dropped out. Some suffered from depression and acne; others had to contend with soaring libidos.
Of the 130 million or so babies born this year, one that arrived in April marked a scientific first. A Jordanian boy was created with DNA from three people (his parents, plus a healthy donor) to prevent him from inheriting a serious genetic disease. The US team who performed the treatment in Mexico say the boy is healthy, but such diseases can take hold later in life. In December, the fertility regulator in the UK gave clinics the green light to apply for a licence to offer the procedure, known as mitochondrial replacement therapy, paving the way for similar births in Britain.
Every year has its own advances, but all tell the story of science. Great ideas work or fail. Achievements are lauded, but make us think twice. With each, we understand that little bit more about ourselves and the universe. And if none of it makes much sense yet? Well, we can always ask the aliens.
• Where did it all go right? For a more positive view of the world in 2017, follow the Guardian’s Half Full online series, with reports on innovative ideas and solutions to the challenges of the day. Wishing you all a happier new year.
In the moments after beating Milos Raonic in straight sets to win the Wimbledon singles title for the second time in July, Andy Murray glanced up at the royal box and saw David Cameron beaming down. Murray, whose politics lean towards Scottish independence, observed for the benefit of Sue Barker, an enthralled Centre Court and those watching worldwide, “A huge thank you to everyone who came out to support me. The prime minister’s here, as well, I see. Playing in a Wimbledon final is tough, but I wouldn’t want to be prime minister. It’s an impossible job.”
Who knew then that within two months Cameron would have left politics completely and Murray would be adding a second Olympic title to his second Wimbledon championship? He then capped the most impressive season of his 11-year career by beating his long-time bete noir, Novak Djokovic, to win the ATP World Tour Finals at the O2 Arena in Greenwich last month, sealing his position as the world’s number one. At 29, he was the oldest player to do so since John Newcombe in 1974.
In 2016, Murray not only established his status as Britain’s most outstanding athlete, but he finally won a permanent place in the affections of an audience that was once reluctant to embrace the sometimes angry Scot. Just about everything went his way this year, both on and off the court. He and his wife, Kim, celebrated the arrival of their first child, Sophia, in February; and once he found a rhythm with the racket after an uncertain start to the season, including defeat by Djokovic in the French Open final, Murray returned from Rio to win five tournaments and 25 matches in a row.
He is back with coach Ivan Lendl, after the surprise departure of Amélie Mauresmo earlier in the summer, and finished the season free of the injuries that have plagued him in previous years. There are strong rumours of a knighthood in the New Year’s honours list.
However ill-equipped Murray might be to run the country, Cameron would gladly have traded places with him that July Sunday, and certainly thereafter. Murray might not have been so keen. Kevin Mitchell
Where to start with Michelle’s Carpool Karaoke? Well, first of all, imagine any British PM or PM’s spouse doing this. So in your car with James Corden you’ve got, say, Theresa May or that fella in the specs she’s married to, Call Me Dave Cameron or Sam Cam, Gordon Brown or Sarah, Tony or Cherie, Maggie or Denis? Imagine just what teeth-clenchingly, bottom-wrigglingly uncomfortable viewing that would make.
But this was positively joyous. Michelle is funny, smart, gorgeous, caring and cool. She is the antidote to everything we despise about the political class. And what makes it even better is that she did it in a year when we’ve never despised them more.
All credit to Corden, who has created a wonderful slot on his Late Late Show. But there was only one star this time: this is all about Michelle. While most politicians would look lost, weird, desperate, unhinged (possibly all four), Michelle is just having a great time, singing her heart out, car-seat boogie-ing while enjoying a jaunt around the White House lawns. It’s impossible not to love her.
There are so many highlights, from Michelle’s first words (“Hey there, you wanna go for a spin?”), to giving up their secret service codenames (hers is Renaissance, Barack’s is Renegade), to Missy Elliott’s surprise pop-up appearance in the back seat. And then there’s the music: Stevie Wonder’s Signed, Sealed, Delivered I’m Yours, Beyoncé’s Single Ladies and Missy’s Get Ur Freak On. Michelle knows all the words and every move.
At the same time, she manages to promote her scheme to get every girl in the world educated, drops in the astonishing fact that 66 million girls are not in school, and gets properly political: “So much could be corrected in the world if girls were educated and had power over their lives.”
This is already a reminder of everything we will miss over the next four years. (And no, I won’t ruin it all by saying his name.) Perhaps Barack wasn’t the transformational politician many had hoped for, but as a family there has not been a finer role model than the Obamas in the White House. Gracious, dignified, warm and, most important of all, human. Never has a first family appeared so normal, or to enjoy life so much – and not at the expense of the others. If you’re still not convinced, just picture Philip May rapping along to Get Ur Freak On. Simon Hattenstone
This year, I was tasked with training Nottinghamshire police to recognise a new category of hate crime: misogyny. We added it to the existing list of disability, race, religion, homophobia, and transphobia. Our definition of it is “incidents against women that are motivated by an attitude of a man towards a woman, and includes behaviour targeted at a woman by men, simply because she is a woman”.
When the policy launched in July, most headlines disappointingly framed this definition around wolf whistling. But we were not inundated with reports of whistling; actual reports included pregnant women being assaulted, girls being harassed in their school uniforms, and one incident that was recategorised as abduction.
If something happens to a woman that makes her uncomfortable, and she feels that it happened because she is a woman, she can now call 101 anywhere in the UK and report it as a hate crime. The difference in Nottingham is that instead of that report going into the “hate crime: other” folder, such incidents are now recorded in their own category, just as “hate crime: disability” would be. Women in Nottingham are guaranteed a specially trained officer to deal with their case. Investigations are launched, and if perpetrators are found, they are warned and hopefully enlightened. In serious cases, public order offences can be given. Where warnings are either too late, or insufficient, this hate crime allows us better to track offender behaviour.
Nationally, 64% of all women have experienced sexual harassment in public places; that figure rises to 85% of women and girls under 25. By reporting, we can begin to identify hotspots, repeat offenders and women who are high risk for victimisation. It’s hoped that by taking these cases seriously, women will feel encouraged to disclose other gendered crimes.
In May, I began training every response officer, beat manager and police community support officer in Nottinghamshire, along with the control room. One focus was safety techniques women can use: avoiding certain areas, wearing silent shoes and carrying keys between their fingers. Female officers would often turn to each other, shocked to realise they did all these things unconsciously. Some officers were taken aback by the statistics and stories that were shared. I found it easy to sympathise. After all, if you’re a man who does not commit misogynistic hate crime yourself, it would be largely hidden from you. Perpetrators rarely harass women who are accompanied by men.
Violence against women needs to be understood as a continuum. We must challenge what’s taking place in the streets alongside our homes, campuses and the workplace. I hope this will become the national standard; the training is now available to all forces. I believe that we will look back in 20 years and wonder what took us so long. Martha Jephcott, campaigner
It is hard to imagine a more perfect antidote to the resurgence of misogyny, homophobia and racism in Brazil than the Olympic victory of Rafaela Silva. The gay black judoka from the City of God favela won the host nation’s first gold of the 2016 Games, lifting the spirits of a population mired in economic gloom and political crisis. The buzzer at the end of the final bout could hardly be heard above delirious cheering as Silva sank to her knees and raised her arms to the rafters. She then ran into the arms of her coach, sobbing with joy, as celebrations erupted across the country.
It was a triumph against adversity, and not just because Silva overcame world number one Sumiya Dorjsuren of Mongolia, who had beaten her on all four of their previous encounters. On her right bicep, Silva has a tattooed reminder of what she has been through: an image of the Olympic rings and the words “Only God knows what I suffered to get here”. She thought about quitting the sport after she was disqualified from the 2012 London Games (for an illegal hold), while furious critics back home posted hate-filled messages on Twitter and Facebook.
But the 24-year-old does not give up easily. Growing up in the City of God, Silva has seen friends and family members shot and arrested for drug dealing. The street games she played as a child were often interrupted by gunfights. At times, gangsters would forbid residents to leave because they were planning an ambush.
Silva credits her father with helping her find a way out: it was he who insisted she take up a sport. Initially she wanted to become a footballer, but boys dominated the community pitch and wouldn’t let her play. “So I had to do a sport I didn’t like – judo,” she tells me, grinning.
The day after the Olympics, Silva went on a victory parade through the favela on top of a fire engine. Her community was delirious. It was the best thing that had ever happened to the City of God, and she is all too aware of the significance: “I’m a black woman and I grew up in this community. I didn’t have big dreams, because there aren’t many opportunities. People here think they have nowhere to go beyond drugs and bullets. But I showed that you can achieve great things even if you don’t have much money.”
The timing was apposite. Shortly before the Olympics, the country’s first woman president, Dilma Rousseff of the Workers’ Party, was ousted in an impeachment plot and replaced by the more conservative Michel Temer, who appointed an all-male, all-white cabinet.
Silva, who is a sergeant in the army, is reluctant to talk politics; she is just glad she was able to inspire people at a time when hope was in short supply. “People come up to me and say thank you, that their children have taken up sport because of me, and that I helped give them a lift. It has been a difficult year for Brazil because of the politics, and violence in the community. Many people doubted we were capable of pulling off an Olympics. But we did it, and we got some medals as well.”
Victory has changed her life, too. She is thinking of getting another tattoo: “I’d like something to mark the victory, but I haven’t decided on the best way to do that.” More significantly, she has paid for an extension on her parents’ home, and bought new houses for her sister and herself. As she says: “That’s a big thing for a girl who grew up in a family who couldn’t afford even to buy a new bicycle.” Jonathan Watts
The fact that the shortlist on this year’s BBC Sports Personality of the Year is 16 as opposed to the more regular 10 is testament to the embarrassment of golden performances from Team GB at the Olympics and Paralympics in Rio this summer.
Olympic and Paralympic sport gets into our hearts, it brings us to tears, to the edge of our seats – and all for people we’ve never heard of before. Every four years, the shot at glory is there. Screw up, and your chance might never come again: you may not even get selected next time. Sure, there are world championships and other titles in the cycle, but it’s the Olympics every athlete wants.
Gymnast Max Whitlock is a man who didn’t just manage to peak at the right time within that cycle, but who peaked twice in 90 minutes, bringing home two gold medals for Great Britain in a sport in which there had previously been none. A history-maker, Whitlock will inspire the next generation of gymnasts to reach higher.
On a global level, the 2016 Olympics gave us moments to savour; we are blessed to be alive to watch Usain Bolt run, to have seen Michael Phelps swim and to watch Simone Biles tumble and twist. But it was a South African called Wayde van Niekerk who brought me to the edge of my seat. From lane nine, he ran a new world record on his way to Olympic gold in the 400m – and the man who held the record, Michael Johnson, was sitting by my side throughout. Talk about drama. Johnson’s reaction was as cool as you’d expect: “I have held that for 17 years. It’s time someone ran faster.”
Women’s sport still gets just 10% of all sports media coverage – except when the Paras and Olympics are on. The likes of the incredible gold-medal-winning women’s hockey team, Laura Trott (now Kenny), Jessica Ennis-Hill, Kadeena Cox and Dame Sarah Storey help to redress that imbalance and boost the column inches. If you are a young girl with sporting ambition and you don’t see these women, how do you know what’s possible? This year’s Games gave us a better idea.
Who would have thought, 12 months ago, that a female hockey player would make it to the last four of I’m A Celebrity… Get Me Out Of Here? Great Britain’s hockey gold has given these women a platform and a voice, and Sam Quek used her elimination night interview very well: “Sport is fun, and that’s what I wanted to show young girls,” she told Ant and Dec. You did that, Sam.
Rio illustrated that we are truly in a golden age when it comes to the Olympics and Paralympics. There was a point at which we overtook China on the medal table, when I thought, “This is all a bit uncomfortably peculiar – such an unfamiliar feeling.” As a keen student of Olympic history (and a failed Olympian wannabe: I was a Commonwealth Games gymnast), I still remember the low of Atlanta 1996 well (one gold and 36th in the medal table). How far we have come. Gabby Logan
When he became the youngest person ever elected to Hong Kong’s legislature, Nathan Law felt the city’s hopes for democracy resting on his shoulders. Two years ago, the 23-year-old was a student leader during months of street protests that saw thousands occupy the former British colony’s financial centre.
“There’s a symbolic meaning to my seat, showing the spirit of the movement continues,” Law says in his new office above the harbour. “It gained a high moral ground and people want me to carry on the fight.” His election victory in September has helped motivate others to become more politically active: his staff are almost all refugees of the 2014 “umbrella movement” protests.
Hong Kong’s pro-democracy movement has long fought an uphill battle, consistently outnumbered in the city’s parliament, where only half the seats are directly elected; the others are returned by professional associations and special interest groups. Law hopes the support he received will translate to more than just votes, and says it is critical to maintain pressure on a government responsible more to Beijing than to Hong Kong citizens.
“People shouldn’t just lay their expectations on me, then go home to play video games, back to their ordinary lives,” he says. “I have to convince people to walk with me on the frontline, and use my position to facilitate civil disobedience and resistance on the streets. Even though we’re up against China, the strongest tyranny in the world, we can at least support human rights and freedom.” Benjamin Haas
As the CofE continued to tie itself in knots over whether same-sex couples could wed in church, or gay priests could marry, the bishop of Grantham publicly declared he was in a long-term relationship with a man. Nicholas Chamberlain told the Guardian he hoped to be “judged by my actions as a parish priest, a bishop – and by the Lord, ultimately. My sexual identity is part of who I am, but it’s the ministry that matters.” He did not want to become known as “the gay bishop”, he added.
Justin Welby, archbishop of Canterbury and leader of the worldwide Anglican church, said he had known about Chamberlain’s relationship when he appointed him. To the fury of conservative Christians, Welby said, “His sexuality is completely irrelevant to his office.”
While Chamberlain says he has abided by the church’s requirement for priests in gay relationships to be celibate, Gafcon, a group of conservative Anglicans, said his appointment was a “major error”. But to campaigners for LGBT rights within the church, the first serving bishop to declare he was gay was a major fillip. Harriet Sherwood
At 7.30pm on 19 September, all was peaceful at Pikpa, a small refugee camp on the Greek island of Lesbos. Most of the volunteers had gone home, and founder Efi Latsoudi was winding down for the day. Then the phone rang: the island’s main camp was on fire and children needed to be evacuated immediately.
Within 10 minutes, 20 volunteers had returned and started preparing to rehouse 98 children. The camp already hosted 150 refugees, mostly families, so they had to improvise, quickly assembling huge tents and setting up beds in the communal kitchen. “The refugee children here were very excited and helped a lot,” Latsoudi says. “I was very proud.”
The new arrivals were terrified at first: “We told them there was nothing to fear – it’s an open camp and they were welcome. They soon relaxed.” Latsoudi laughs: “It was like a holiday for them.”
Pikpa is a former children’s holiday camp with wooden cabins, shady pine trees and play areas. Compared with the two major camps on the island, which routinely flood or catch fire, it’s paradise. The children stayed for three days before being taken back, and on the last night, the whole camp had a big dinner and dancing.
Latsoudi says those three days were among the happiest of her life. “Everybody was running around, working together – it was amazing. In all this mess, suddenly something worked out.” Helen Nianias
• Where did it all go right? For a more positive view of the world in 2017, follow the Guardian’s Half Full online series, with reports on innovative ideas and solutions to the challenges of the day. Wishing you all a happier new year.
To begin a column by referencing The OC, a teen TV show that ended nine years ago, probably dates me only marginally less than the fact that the album I listened to most this year, Spotify tells me, was Pure R&B 90s. The cutting bleeding edge, that’s what you come here for, folks.
The OC, a show that is discussed these days with baffling infrequency, brought a lot of good into my life. First, it resolved the question of what happened to Jim Robinson from Neighbours (AKA the actor Alan Dale) after his too-early heart attack on the Ramsay Street kitchen floor, and the answer was, somewhat unexpectedly, he became a mean multimillionaire in California. Did anyone tell his mother-in-law, Helen Daniels, about this? Or was she too busy running her chauffeur service, Home James, to listen? But it also gave nomenclature to a rarely articulated and yet annual event in my life. Chrismukkah, undoubtedly The OC’s greatest (only) legacy.
Chrismukkah is the portmanteau coined by the show’s character Seth Cohen to refer to the celebration of both Christmas and Hanukah. But the show fudges the issue by saying Seth had to do this because his father is Jewish and his mother a Wasp. The truth is, a lot of Jews – in fact, nearly every Jew I know – does it just because they want to. Hey, we might say our prayers in Hebrew instead of Latin but we want to eat chocolate Santas for 10 days straight, too, OK?
Another TV show nodded to this. In Seinfeld, George Costanza’s father creates Festivus, “A festivus for the rest of us!” For Festivus, the Costanzas have an undecorated aluminium pole instead of a Christmas tree; but a lot of Jews love the actual Christmas paraphernalia, trees and all, because, dammit, it’s so pretty and cheering and a lot of it is really, really tasty (not the tree). Given how guilty we feel anyway, this is not an easy thing to admit.
I have always lived a Chrismukkah life. I am fully Jewish – nothing ish about it – and yet, every December, after eight nights of lighting candles and saying prayers, my parents would go buy a Christmas tree while my sister and I wrote wishlists for Santa. And for years I thought this was totally normal (though I knew enough not to mention it at Hebrew school).
In my 20s, a Jewish boyfriend(ish) and I stopped off at my parents’ house one December evening. He looked around my parents’ living room, my mother’s Christmas village (don’t ask) in one corner, the tree in another, the handmade stockings for all four of us hanging from the mantelpiece, and he then looked at me as if I’d just admitted I was an undercover MI5 agent and had a heretofore unmentioned husband and four children stashed up in Manchester.
“Look,” I said, “Christmas involves family, an outrageous number of calories, the deification of a baby boy and the secular worship of a fat man with out-of-control facial hair: there are few holidays more Jewish than Christmas.” My mother appeared in the doorway: “Are you two staying for dinner? We’re having pork chops.”
The loss, I think we can all agree, was his.
And for a moment, I did feel like a bad Jew. Is this what I went to Hebrew school for, to celebrate Jesus’ birthday? But I know myself very well and one truth I have long accepted is that I’m greedy: I want the (vaguely religious) little Jewish holiday that sets me apart and the (largely secular) global one that lets me join the party.
Anyway, today is a proper Chrismukkah, because for only the fifth time in 100 years the first night of Hanukah begins tonight, on Christmas Eve. Something to do with the quirks of the lunar and Gregorian calendars (I’d explain this in greater detail but I used up my wordcount on the Helen Daniels joke). For us Chrismukkah Jews, this is, to be honest, a bit of a kick in the pants: we usually get to drag out our celebrations (and demands for presents) for a month – like the Queen’s birthday, only with more dreidels. But this year Christians and Jews (the properly observant ones, not the lightweight Chrismukkah ones) are all lighting their candles together, which, let’s face it, is an unexpectedly hopeful way to end a year defined otherwise entirely by divisions. And let me tell you, eating chocolate coins and chocolate Santas in one sitting is not just possible – it’s recommended. Happy Chrismukkah.
Add a littles sparkle to your outfits with this festive jewellery – and not a bauble in sight
Avoiding politics at the dinner table may prove harder than ever this Christmas for families on opposite sides of Britain’s intergenerational Brexit divide.
Voters over 65 were more than 50% more likely to vote to leave the European Union than those under 34, and polls suggest opinions have hardened since. Divorce lawyers have already warned that differing views on the subject are also an added source of stress in many marriages.
At Thanksgiving, when American families gathered for the first time after the equally divisive election of Donald Trump, the New York Times was so worried it published a list of “election facts to keep handy for holiday discussions”. In the interest of similarly avoiding a post-truth Christmas in the UK, here is a festive bluffer’s guide to latest twists and turns of the Brexit debate to keep by the crackers:
Six months on from the referendum we know a lot more about the demographics of the electorate. A recent study by NatCen Social Research found the people most likely to vote leave were those without formal educational qualifications (78%), those with a monthly income of less than £1,200 (66%) and those in social housing (68%). Voters against EU membership were also more likely to be white, male, and readers of the Sun or the Daily Express. Anyone brave enough to point this out over Christmas pudding should bear in mind that just 9% of leave voters said they were regular readers of the Guardian. Remainers were also heavily concentrated in London, Scotland and Northern Ireland, but in a minority elsewhere.
In private, one European finance minister puts the chances of the Brexit “experiment” being abandoned as high as 25%. Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, has proposed the radical solution of Scotland staying in the single market even if the rest of the UK leaves. In London, it is hard to find anyone in any doubt that the UK government will at least have to give full Brexit a very good try before the next general election. There is always a risk that unforeseen events – another financial crisis or a wider EU unravelling, for example – can intervene, but the likelihood is they won’t. This is happening.
A supreme court judgment on the government’s right to start divorce proceedings by invoking article 50 without consulting parliament is due in the middle of January. The government is expected to lose, but the impact of the case has been undermined by growing signs that it could easily assemble enough MPs to pass the necessary legislation. An amendment to a Labour motion calling for more transparency in the process saw just 23 Labour MPs vote against their party whip in protest at the very idea of invoking article 50.
The Guardian’s latest Brexit barometer confirms that many of the more dire economic projections of the impact of a leave vote have yet to come to pass. That does not mean they won’t, though. There are already worrying signs of anxiety about Britain’s future trading arrangements that can be seen in the slumping value of sterling. EU negotiators are also threatening to extract a £50bn divorce settlement as the price of agreeing a post-membership deal which our ambassador has warned could take a decade. In the meantime, banks and carmakers are warning of an exodus if a transitional arrangement is not agreed to soften the “cliff edge”. Don’t throw out the candles just yet.
Ah. This is where lunch could get awkward. The truth is we don’t have one yet. Theresa May has said she will give a speech in January setting out the broad aims of Britain’s negotiating position. The Brexit minister, David Davis, has said he will publish a slightly fuller, but not very full, outline for parliament to debate in March. The prime minister also admitted to the Commons liaison committee on Tuesday that leaving the EU without any sort of agreement on the terms of divorce let alone future relations was one of several contingency plans that Whitehall was preparing for. There is now talk of soft Brexit, hard Brexit or “train-crash” Brexit, with the smart money increasingly on something between the last two.
Since my family will be having a vast Christmas dinner with a raft of Australian fly-in guests spreading through several rooms, I have made it known, in my position as patriarch, that I favour a simple solution to the question of which big bird to feature, goose or turkey. Magisterially, I suggested that there should be both.
Thus I dodged the question that stumped Theresa May, who was airborne when some pain in the arse of a reporter tried to frame her as a plutocat for favouring goose. Either the same pain in the arse of a reporter or a different one also tried to frame her for spending too much money on a pair of leather trousers. She dodged that question by implying, surely correctly, that her trousers were good for the leather industry, for British couture, and indeed for almost every living entity in Britain, except perhaps the animals from which the leather was peeled.
Anything to stave off the dumb reporters until the day arrives when Fleet Street finally twigs that Theresa is the biggest fashion asset to Britain since the first years of the Queen’s reign. When the penny drops, the smart reporters will be put on the case and Theresa will find that the quality of questioning she must face will go up by a mile.
I haven’t been studying the future president Trump’s schedule, but it’s a fair bet that he will turn up at No 10 before May turns up at the White House. Should the second eventuality prove to be the case, the president would be able to stave off awkwardness at the state dinner by giving the cue for another medley from Tony Bennett. But if the president is at No 10, he will be almost alone with her and face to face with what I am certain is his chief psychological problem. Like any other man who drivels about women when he is alone with a man, when alone with a woman, he has no clue what to say.
Hence Trump’s frequent verbal atrocities. They are all boasts and, like all boasts, they spring from an aching wish. My own guess is that Theresa, having sussed in advance that her interlocutor is a blithering saddo, will put him at his ease with an extravagant compliment about his non-existent personal magnetism. “That thing on your head is divine,” she will be already saying during the soup course. “So elegant, yet so masculine. How do you keep it in place? Surely only the strongest industrial adhesive can contain something so powerfully virile?” By that time, she will be breathing in his ear and he eating out of her hand. Cue violins.
Apparently there are people who don’t watch television at Christmas. The mind boggles. What do these people do with all that time, traditionally spent with their families? If they’re not arguing over whether Coronation Street or EastEnders is better or explaining to Aunty Esther that yes, Doctor Who is the same programme that they watched in 2005, but no, David Tennant hasn’t aged dramatically, are they actually conversing meaningfully with each other? And if so, what about? Because if you open up the Pandora’s box marked But Why Did You Vote Brexit, Granny?, you’re a bolder – and markedly more patient – person than I am. Because a Pandora’s box is still a Pandora’s box, even if it’s gift-wrapped with paper from M&S’s “Quirky” range that features a cigar-smoking Rudolph strapping Santa into leather reins while snarling “How do you like that, old man?”
Actually, the mind Boggles. Because, following my in-depth research, I discovered that these no-TV people do activities and play games, like Ludo, Cluedo, charades and “you be Tubbs, me be Edward”. Clearly, they are missing the point of Christmas. Because television is the point of Christmas. How else to explain that staff at the Radio Times sacrifice a not-insignificant amount of their sanity each year producing such mighty guides to the festive schedules? I worked on three Christmas Radio Times and those experiences are my Vietnam. Yes, even more so than the years slaving at The Guardian being paid only in magic beans and contemptuous looks from the people who went to Oxbridge.
But let’s not dwell on my workplace traumas. Television – especially Christmas television – is about unalloyed joy. It is being absolutely entranced by Den handing Angie divorce papers in the Vic. It is learning by heart that bit from Evil Under the Sun where Peter Ustinov’s Poirot enigmatically explains how he alighted on the identity of Arlena Marshall’s killer: “A bathing cap, a bath, a bottle, a wrist watch, the diamond, the noonday gun, the breath of the sea and the height of the cliff.”
It is, years later, watching Christmas episodes of Coronation Street and Emmerdale and being proud that I had helped storyline them. It is standing up for the start of the Queen’s speech, scattering an entire box of Maltesers far and wide across the living room and finding them under the sofa until, if you’re lucky/slatternly, Valentine’s Day.
While I’m not one to blow my own trumpet – why have a dog and bark yourself? – I was on the Queen’s speech once, in 1999. Given how manic my mobile phone went then (about four minutes 47 seconds in) with excited and bewildered messages, I’d say that more people than you imagine watch the Queen’s Christmas message.
These are Christmas traditions. Not only is television social glue – there was watercooler TV long before there were watercoolers – it is the essence of Christmas because television tells stories. And what’s Christmas but a story? It’s only where it is, temporally speaking, because early Christians wanted to pull focus from pagan celebrations of the winter solstice and such, and so came up with an alternative story. And then slaughtered those who didn’t prefer that story. (I know what’s gone on in the world: I listen to In Our Time. Ask me ANYTHING about the Baltic Crusades or the siege of Tenochtitlan and I will tell you).
Of course, the biggest story of all – stories are like lies but longer, remember – is that you’re meant to spend Christmas with your family, that you’re meant to have a good time, that Christmas is fun. While the best stories are fictions that illuminate bigger truths, this story – this lie – is just meant to make you feel bad if you don’t enjoy Christmas, if you don’t swallow the received wisdom, stuffing and all.
It is meant to make you feel guilty if you don’t look forward to the festive season with its rampant consumerism and endless tinsel-tinged songs on the radio, if you don’t don an elf-emblazoned jumper that would have Karen Walker – she of the cute angina – wagging a quizzical finger at Grace Adler and wondering “Honey, What’s going on? What’s happening? What’s that?”
As someone who grew up in a house where it was declared that Christmas was “an English thing” – apparently on account of Christmas historically not being a public holiday in Scotland – let me tell you that you are not alone in not thinking that Christmas is all that it’s crackered up to be.
That said, Christmas can be fun. If you watch television.
There will, of course, be a flurry of stories, around four days hence, that overnight ratings are down for the terrestrial broadcast channels for the umpteenth year in a row, as more and more people prefer to watch catch-up, on-demand and shows on Netflix and Amazon. I can’t pretend that I’m not a little sad at the lost prospect of the nation sitting down as one and watching the Christmas Downton Abbey and wondering when the actual story is going start. But things change. And in this, as in other respects, it’s best to summon the serenity to accept it.
Besides, it’s not as if everyone is abandoning what we used to call television all together. People still want to watch stories on screens, whether that screen is on the sideboard or in the palm of your hand. As I have only recently discovered the true meaning of “Netflix and chill” – and I now understand why men look so disappointed when I turn up at their door with a triple-box of Jaffa Cakes and rave reviews for Lady Dynamite – my opinion is probably not to be trusted. However, I cannot think of a more Christmassy show than Netflix’s The OA. It’s about existential loneliness. (I am only four episodes in, so NO SPOILERS, thanks). Like Christmas, it is occasionally funny but mostly emotionally gruelling. So much so, in fact, that it makes Jessica Jones look like Mary Poppins.
But before you get all excited at the prospect of headlines proclaiming that Netflix Killed Christmas, that will be next year. And that’s only if Donald Trump, Henry Kissinger and this impending fascist phase of neoliberalism doesn’t kill us all first. Seasons greetings, cannon fodder.
What is the Queen going to find in her cracker tomorrow? Whatever it might be, it is certain the cracker itself arrived in a box labelled “Tom Smith”.
The original Tom Smith has good claim to be the inventor of the modern Christmas cracker. This week the V&A museum revealed what is inside an un-cracked 1927 Tom Smith with a design celebrating a musical called A Romance of the Canadian Rockies. The cracker was given to the museum by one of the musical’s chorus girls. An x-ray of the “totem” cracker shows that it still contains a chocolate.
This kind of showbusiness tie-in was typical in the heyday of the cracker. In the Edwardian period, the Tom Smith Company was producing more than 200 designs a year.
Born in 1823, Smith was a confectioner whose research into new product ideas turned up the Parisian practice of wrapping a sugared almond in a piece of paper twisted at each end, sometimes with a printed “love motto” included, too.
Smith went into business in the 1840s from his Finsbury premises, and consumers soon fell for his “ingenious” and “dainty” packaged almonds. You can spot a wrapped bonbon – just like Smith’s – hanging from Victoria and Albert’s Christmas tree at Windsor Castle, which was immortalised in an engraving for the special Christmas edition of the Illustrated London News in 1848.
This influential image of the royal couple and their children helped to popularise the German custom of a Christmas tree in Britain. But perhaps even more significantly, it spread the idea that Christmas was family time. People started to spend it at home in their own parlours, and to spend money on toys, gifts and decorations.
Smith made his big break in 1861 with a new product line called Bangs of Expectation. For the first time, these were recognisable crackers with a bang. You didn’t unwrap them; you pulled them.
Tradition has it that Smith invented the bang while staring one night into the fire, and being startled by the loud snapping sound of a log. But the research of Peter Kimpton, an expert on the history of crackers and a former employee of the Tom Smith Company, has discovered a more plausible chain of events. He cites the testimony of a rival businessman, Mr Brock of Brock’s Fireworks Manufactory in Nunhead, London. Brock claimed that Smith cannily bought the chemical recipe for the bang from Brock’s own pyro-technician, one Tom Brown.
Smith, then, was rather like his fellow Victorian entrepreneur Thomas Crapper. Many people think Crapper invented the flushing toilet, but really he was just a marketing genius who stamped his own name on the plumbing products he sold to the public. Smith, too, took care to promote his goods as the original and best: “See Tom Smith’s name on every box,” he advised his customers.
And with the bang, Smith perfected the idea that a cracker was entertainment. In this, he was building on a long history of festive parlour games.
Cracker contents became non-perishable, to allow for wider distribution. From the 1880s, Smith’s son introduced the paper crown, harking back to the ancient tradition of the Lord of Misrule, a person of low status who would preside over the Christmas festivities in a medieval household in an inversion of the normal social order. On Christmas Day, even the humble are crowned king.
The company’s buyers scoured trade fairs for cracker gifts that were often rich and rare: perhaps a little fan from Japan, or a knick-knack in Bohemian glass.
In many ways, these cracker gifts encapsulate the Victorian passion for junk. Living standards were rising and pockets were jingling; manufacturers had cracked the secret of making “must-have” things to sell to other middle-class Victorians.
The love motto in Tom Smith’s crackers also has its own history. Victorian families would have relished the reading out of a sentimental poem such as this 1875 offering: “Oh flowers, sweet flowers, the fairest gems that earth upon her bounteous bosom loves to cherish.” In true Victorian fashion, though, the poem ends with death: the flowers, “like morning dreams … quickly perish”.
The poems became rapidly less romantic in the 20th century. As the range expanded, you could buy more specialised crackers, like the Suffragette cracker of 1910. Its motto ran: “We want (as quickly as we can) / To have our say / Most likely ‘yes!’ / And to become ‘a match for man’”.
Then there were crackers aimed at that novel creature, the motorist: “And my poor heart, oh is it fair / To puncture it beyond repair?” The descent from romance towards the groan-making pun of today’s cracker had clearly begun.
And the answer to the mystery of what might be inside the Queen’s own cracker? The choice has often been surprisingly low-key. “No diamond brooches”, cracker historian Kimpton says, “more often things like key fobs.”
Raymond Briggs would have good grounds for feeling every bit as grouchy as he likes to appear. Late last year, his partner of 40 years died of Parkinson’s disease; she had been ill for years, many more than he had realised. “You look back and think: ‘God, that was odd, the things Liz did.’ I came home one day years ago and saw this lovely carpet out on the grass. Extraordinary. Why throw it away? I couldn’t understand it. I mean, God almighty, it was very exasperating. But at the time, we didn’t know she was ill. It was this creeping, awful disease thing.” He inhales briskly. “Never mind. Bit of a bugger, but there we are, such is life. Never mind.”
This is the second time the illustrator has been widowed. In 1963 he married a painter he met at art school. “I wasn’t a madly keen marrying type or burning with love or anything. I mean, I loved her, but I don’t particularly approve of marriage as such. Or disapprove. It just seems pointless to tie up your emotional relationship with the law. Always seems awful to me.” But she had schizophrenia, “and we got married mainly because I thought it would help her mental state – give her a feeling of stability”. So although Briggs was “the normal sort of young arty type”, he saw little of the 1960s.
“I had a house and a mortgage and all that, and didn’t feel part of the 60s movement thing at all. I remember saying to friends, ‘I’m sick to death of hearing about these fucking Beatles. I’m not the least bit interested’.” His wife died in 1973, of “schizophrenia combined with leukaemia”. Under his breath, he mutters, “God, that was a jolly one-man-band.”
As Briggs talks, he shuffles around his cluttered cottage making coffee. Papers are stacked all over the place; he is currently making his will. “Terrible bloody business. They say: ‘Who is your next of kin?’ Well, I don’t have a next of kin. I asked [Liz’s daughter] Claire, ‘Would you mind being my next of kin?’ But she’s not my daughter, nor even a stepdaughter.” Now touching 50, Claire and her brother were at primary school when Briggs and their mother became a couple, but he never felt paternal towards them.
“No, I kept out of the paternal role. I made it a rule not to buy them anything for Christmas that cost more than a fiver, because I didn’t want to be saying, ‘Oh, look at me, I’m better-off than your father.’ I didn’t want to intrude in that way.” He pauses glumly. “Yes, it’s a funny old business, all this stuff. People idealise family life, don’t they? It’s not necessarily all that easy.” For that matter, “I’ve never been particularly interested in children at all, as such. Don’t particularly dislike them. But I’m not,” and his tone turns crisply disdainful, “a ‘child lover’.”
The bestselling children’s author was appalled to be considered a potential children’s laureate some years ago. “I didn’t see the point of that. It sounded awful. You go all over the country. Imagine it! The hotels and bed-and-breakfasts and taxis and trains, and really you just think: for God’s sake, what for? I suppose if you like that kind of public appearance, it’s alright, but I’d hate it.” He isn’t keen on lifetime achievement awards, either. “I’ve had one or two of those, and it’s a rather funny title, because come on, my lifetime hasn’t ended yet. But if you say you’ve got a lifetime achievement award, it’s like – well come on, get dead, man!” And he famously, of course, “hates Christmas”.
I’m not convinced Briggs is anything like the miserabilist he affects to be. For one thing, he follows every grumpy pronouncement with a light little laugh, as if in on his own joke. For another, he volunteers a touchingly tender memory of meeting me on holiday in Scotland more than 30 years ago. I was only a child, so I don’t think he can find kids an unmitigated bore. Tentatively solicitous, he offers up a plate of chocolate brownies with a gentle air of inexpert hospitality, and his bah-humbug misanthropy is difficult to square with his kitchen walls, which are plastered with handmade cards and children’s drawings. In a child’s handwriting, one card reads: “Raymond, you are really funny, lots of love, Matilda.” Another shows a child’s drawing of him. “Hideous caricature, you know. Doesn’t look anything like me at all.” But in spite of himself, he is grinning fondly, and points out a photo of a girl holding a copy of his book The Bear, which features a character called Tilly.
“This little girl fell in love with Tilly and the bear, so she made her parents call her Tilly, and was so insistent that in the end they changed her name legally. Best compliment I ever had.” He allows a bashful chuckle, plainly delighted. All over the rest of the wall are Christmas cards from the year before last. “Couldn’t be bothered to take them down,” is the mumbled and rather unconvincing explanation.
On another wall are posters of his two classic Christmas works, Father Christmas and The Snowman, making me wonder if he really does hate Christmas. “Oh, I do,” he insists, but the reason he offers is not one that would belong to an actual misanthrope. “It’s the anxiety. Have I spent enough, too much, how do I get it there, did I give her this before, has she already got this?” To me, he sounds like someone who cares very much about making others happy, but has never quite been sure how to get it right, and so learned long ago to disguise social awkwardness as gruff impatience. An anecdote he tells about receiving a second invitation to appear on Desert Island Discs only confirms my hunch that his big fear is not public acclaim, but making a public faux pas. “I was so relieved when towards the end of the second time the presenter said: ‘We’ve had you on before.’ I thought: ‘Oh, thank God, I didn’t think you knew, yes you have.’”
What he cannot conceal is his delight at the reception his latest film has received. “I’ve been to three or four screenings, and the audience has applauded at the end every time. Amazing! Amazing.” Peering at me, he enquires casually: “They don’t applaud at the end of a film in the cinema very often these days, do they?” Happy to confirm they do not, I’m nonetheless not remotely surprised to hear that they did for Ethel & Ernest.
The film is an adaptation of his 1998 book of the same name, and tells the simple story of his parents’ unremarkable lives. Briggs’ father was a milkman, who spotted a pretty housemaid shaking a duster from the window of a grand Belgravia house one day in 1928; he knocked at the back door, they courted briefly, got married, bought a house in Wimbledon, and doted on their only son, Raymond. Ernest was an irrepressibly happy-go-lucky working-class lad, Ethel a little less worldly but more aspirational. They remained happily married right up until their deaths in 1971, Ethel from dementia, and Ernest just months later from cancer.
The film will be screened on Wednesday 28 December on BBC1, and on paper sounds so slight that I was quite unprepared for its impact – poignant and subtle, yet powerful enough to haunt me for weeks afterwards. Through Ethel and Ernest’s ordinary, uneducated, innocent eyes we see the 20th century unfold, from the Great Depression and the rise of Hitler to the second world war and the welfare state; new-fangled mysteries such as television and telephones to the marvel of a family motor car, and the unfathomable sensations of the 60s – all the short-skirted women and long-haired men. Voiced by Jim Broadbent and Brenda Blethyn, Mr and Mrs Briggs are evoked so perfectly that their son spent most of the recording sessions in tears. “It was as if my parents were right there in the room. Uncanny. I don’t know how they did it so well.”
I’m equally at a loss to explain why I was moved to tears by a historiographically mundane recap of events we all know inside out. I had been floored once before by a Briggs film, but anyone could see why When the Wind Blows, his film about nuclear war, would have traumatised a teenager in 1986. It’s been years since that chilling dread of global Armageddon left me, so I ask Briggs why he thinks Ethel & Ernest feels so ominously resonant now.
“Ah, because now that dread’s coming back.” He reels off a few current trigger points – China and Taiwan, eastern Ukraine, Russian warships cruising the English channel – “and you think, my God, it could all be seen as utterly trivial – or it could be seen as something immensely serious. You just don’t know what’s going to happen, with a lunatic like Trump. And when we left that Europe thing, that Brexit nonsense, I was just so horrified. Crazy. When Nato and the UN were created, we thought it meant there could never be another world war. Well, there bloody well could be. Terrifying, isn’t it? Can’t believe it.”
Had Briggs made a film about his own life (“Good God, no!”), I wonder which world events we would have seen through his eyes? “Oh, blimey. That’s a big question.” He pauses to think. “Well, the worst thing was the Cuban missile crisis, wasn’t it? I remember feeling actual physical fear while that was going on. I remember looking out of the window of my bedsit in Wimbledon, and thinking: my God, by Monday all this I’m looking at could be a smoking ruin.”
He isn’t sure that he would still call himself a pacifist – “I don’t know, quite. Depends on the circumstances” – but is definitely no longer “solidly Labour. I used to be solid all the way through. But now I wouldn’t know who to vote for. I certainly wouldn’t vote Labour any more.” He despairs of his once-loved party under Jeremy Corbyn. “The whole thing’s just rubbish, isn’t it? Falling apart.”
No matter how politically bleak the world’s prospects, I had assumed Briggs could always console himself with his wealth, but when I say so, he looks astounded. “No, no, oh no. I’m not rich.” But The Snowman alone has sold more than 8m copies! “Has it? Oh, I expect the publishers just say that.” I’m fairly sure book sales are rigorously audited. “Oh. Really?” He looks genuinely surprised, but still insists he isn’t rich. “I don’t take any interest in it,” he adds. “As long as there’s enough to pay the bills, I couldn’t tell you how much I earn.” He hasn’t bought a house since the 70s, drives a second-hand Honda Jazz, and likes to shop in charity stores, so unless he has the world’s worst literary agent, I would guess he’s a lot richer than he either needs or cares to know.
I’m far from the first to notice Briggs’ temperamental resemblance to his crotchety fictional Father Christmas. But for all of his faux gloom, by the time I leave, only two of his grievances ring wholly true. He says he hates being old because “everything hurts”, he’s “TATT – tired all the time”, and random words keep eluding him. I believe him because they are written out in black marker pen as an aide memoire on his kitchen wall: probate, secular, prostate, migraine, narcissistic, sociopath, water chestnuts, merlot, post-script, Jim Broadbent, Brenda Blethyn, Katie Price – Jordan, ciabatta, diabetes, ragwort, Velcro and many more. The list would keep a Through the Keyhole audience guessing for ever, but Briggs has had quite enough by now of TV camera crews “poking around and moving bits of furniture. You don’t know whether they’re pinching things at the same time!”
Nor do I doubt the sincerity of his indignation about the Guardian’s review of Ethel & Ernest. “It said the film mentions my wife’s schizophrenia, but that it’s barely touched on. Well, what do you fucking expect? You can’t just embark upon schizophrenia when you’re writing about something else! It’s a huge subject. If you knew anything about it, you’d know you’d need half a dozen books to write about it.”
As for the rest of it, my guess is that however much Briggs, like his fictional Father Christmas, loves to grumble, he likes making us happy even more.
•Ethel & Ernest is on BBC1 at 7.30pm on Wednesday 28 December
1 Whose birth date was crucially miscalculated by Dionysius Exiguus?
2 What art label was coined by Roger Fry for a 1910 exhibition?
3 Who thought, “Maybe Christmas… doesn’t come from a store”?
4 What is the longest nerve in the human body?
5 Which composer managed an orange plantation in Florida?
6 Hamnet Sadler was a beneficiary of whose will?
7 Jonathan’s Coffee-House in Change Alley was the original site of what?
8 Eating what fast food is a Christmas tradition in Japan?
What links:
9 Charles Perrault; Grimm Brothers; Tex Avery; Gillian Cross; Angela Carter?
10 Draw; stud; community card?
11 Square (Theodore Roosevelt); New (FDR); Fair (Truman)?
12 Norway; Wartburg Castle; Cornwall; Nuremberg?
13 Labuan, Sabah and Sarawak; Brunei; Kalimantan?
14 Vaults; Aurora; Tom Odell; Lily Allen; Gabrielle Aplin?
15 Goliath; Holofernes; John the Baptist?
1 Jesus. 
2 Postimpressionism. 
3 The Grinch. 
4 Sciatic. 
5 Frederick Delius. 
6 Shakespeare. 
7 London Stock Exchange. 
8 KFC. 
9 Versions of Red Riding Hood. 
10 Varieties of poker. 
11 Deals, so-called, offered by US Presidents. 
12 Settings of Wagner operas: The Flying Dutchman; Tannhäuser; Tristan Und Isolde; Die Meistersinger. 
13 Political division of Borneo: Malaysia; Brunei; Indonesia. 
14 Sang on John Lewis Christmas adverts 2016-2012. 
15 Beheaded in the Bible/Apocrypha.
One Christmas day some 20 years ago, I was the prime suspect at what was almost a murder scene – at least in my head.
We had invited a lonely old lady for dinner. At that time, I reckoned I was pretty conscientious in my charitable attendance on those less fortunate than myself. I gave, but with discrimination. So, while I had concluded that there were occasions when it was OK to walk by on the other side, there were also times when it was not. Hence the Christmas hospitality.
My first encounter with Mrs C had been at a bus stop earlier in the year. She was a birdlike creature in her 70s, chirpy, stiffly moving on staccato legs, like an arthritic pigeon. On the ride home and on the walk to her house, as I carried her shopping, she chirruped incessantly.
She was high on the eccentricity spectrum, but in brief doses she was good company and I would drop by once every few weeks for coffee and a chat. As a result both of her own bad choices and of happenstance, she suffered from chronic loneliness, which had produced an obsessive need to talk, alongside a self-destructive inability to listen. She was a victim, which was how she came to be invited to join our family – myself, wife and seven-year-old son – for Christmas.
It’s always the little things, isn’t it? She arrived empty-handed, and in that nanosecond an infection took hold. Then she sat down, unbidden, in the “wrong” chair, and we were trapped in the presence of royalty. She held court. She simply never stopped talking, even when gabble-gobbling the food on which, to add insult to injury, she passed a couple of critical comments – and she had clearly fasted for a couple of days beforehand. We had four hours of an unbroken monologue about her life, its accidents, the state of her organs, her discontent with the world. And not a word to our son.
I think it was the latter that inflamed conventional irritation into thoughts of homicide. To keep these at bay, my wife and I – and, once he got the hang of it, our son – indulged a displacement strategy whereby we made faces, interjected irony, essentially subjected Mrs C to covert ridicule.
When I finally took her home, I felt the first drops of remorse. She invited me in and handed me three beautifully wrapped presents. Three days later, the remorse exploded into a tsunami when a handwritten note came through the door to say thank you.
That incident taught me something about charity, fairly apposite in this season of goodwill. It was her failure to conform to the role of grateful recipient that set my teeth on edge; it was her refusal to play the victim, her insistence on setting the agenda, on ignoring the basic social rules, that generated the homicidal reaction.
Yet here was I, a community worker, exhibiting all the traits of social hubris. I knew how suffering often intensifies the very behaviours that made someone a victim in the first place. I may not have known the detail of what life had done to Mrs C, what had made her so socially eccentric, but I should have known what to expect. And when I got it, when she asserted herself, I resented it.
I now recognise that the whole project of sharing our Christmas was flawed, and it taught me a salutary lesson. It taught me something about what could be termed benefaction. Caring can lead us to expect the objects of our care to be gracious in their receipt of our largesse, to accept unreservedly our support; essentially, to know their place.
And when they don’t, when the victim refuses to submit to their victimhood, when they insist instead on retaining ownership, they challenge our charity and we take offence. What I learned, that shameful Christmas, is that charity, care, whatever you call it, is essentially a two-way process, in which the recipients may be victims to us, but they are desperately seeking to restore the selfhood that the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune have eroded.
That is their right and, while we are distributing the Ferrero Rocher, it behoves us to pay attention. There’s a lesson for the 1% in there somewhere.
“Dad, why’s the Ooh Ah bird called the Ooh Ah bird?” asks Millie, her beautiful face glowing with Christmassy enthusiasm. “I don’t know,” I lie. “Because it lays square eggs,” she squeals.
She, Matt and I laugh uproariously at the well-worn joke from the 1977 Good Life Christmas Special. We love watching Jerry, Margo, Tom and oh-so-sexy Barbara (pre-pubescent crush lingering on) in this episode, Silly, But It’s Fun. It has been part of our festive ritual for many years. Margo’s Christmas order is not delivered – “Jerry, Christmas is cancelled” – before they have a simple but super day with their lovely self-sufficient friends next door.
This year is the first time we have watched it without Helen, but we are OK. Better than OK. In Yorkshire at the new cottage by the sea, we are playing out my vision of a place of sanctuary with family. If you half close your eyes, you might think Helen is still here, spreading her festive warmth and endless enthusiasm, love and laughter.
So far, it is working. Coming to the village that Helen knew and loved risked emotional seasonal meltdown, but the cottage is new to us and we are laying down memories of a new life without Helen as a physical presence, but with us in memory and spirit.
Amid the carols, Matt’s newly purchased dancing Father Christmas sings continuously and accurately – “Can’t touch Christmas.” It skims the surface of being bleeding annoying only because it does so in the style of MC Hammer, whose baggy-trousered performance I still have a soft spot for. Not so soft, though, that it won’t have a Boxing Day accident, knocked off the pier, weighed down with a Christmas pudding.
Getting up north was tricky. “You look buggered already,” said Pete over a festive dads’ beer before we left. I was a little jaded because I had drunk too much the night before after a melancholy ambush. I’d seen a fantastic art deco lamp and thought, “That’ll make a great present for Helen,” before catching myself in my mistake.
It has also been physically exhausting sorting every present, food order, playmate, invitation and the thousand other things Helen and I, but mainly Helen, had previously organised. I have now given up work, but that worry is lost in the mayhem and anticipation of the big day and a background fear of it being the first Christmas in 26 years without a gift from Helen. The only gift I want I can’t have – sad proof in a way that team Good Life would approve: Christmas doesn’t come by van or in a box.
Millie and Matt have been brilliant and raise my spirits; writing Christmas lists as usual and embracing the magic, I suspect as much for my sake as theirs. But it works. We have been out on the rocks collecting driftwood to fashion an alternative festive twigs tree and Matt is delighted to have found a very big piece of wood shaped like Rudolf’s antlers, on which he is hanging baubles.
Helen’s family are with us and this gives us more than enough critical mass for games and a general busyness that holds upset at bay.
Last year, a few days after Helen’s last Christmas, we visited Dennis Severs’s House in London. It is extraordinary, set up as though there is a family of Huguenot silk-weavers living there who leave the room just as you enter. The dining room has dinner set mid-meal, candles lit, with all the appropriate smells. You go around in silence, which helps the effect. With the kids so excited there is little silence here but enough room and general shenanigans to believe Helen is with us and has just popped on ahead. Far from being upsetting, I find it quietly reassuring, so powerful is her presence. A good place in every way. There’s laughter, optimism and joy.
This is the easy Christmas. I suspect we are all in shock and next year will be the acid test. Helen’s Aunt Lillian sent me a framed Emily Dickinson poem, Hope Is the Thing, which I had railed at because hope was defeated by death. Now I get it, and and, in a Dickensian inversion, we are all loving Christmas Present, comforted, not haunted, by Christmas Past. Christmas Future? We’ll be OK. Merry Christmas.
I wish I could remember what had made us smile. This photograph, which sums up my relationship with my aunt Gloria, is a window on to family Christmases past – to which she always brought generosity and energy, and a festive jumper.
I do know that it was taken more than a quarter of a century ago, on Christmas Day 1990. My shirt gives it away: silk, designer, my pride and joy, snapped up in Bloomingdale’s when I was breathless with excitement on my first visit to New York earlier in the year.
Gloria loved to travel and always encouraged me, my brother and sister to ask questions, explore new places and seize the chance of different experiences. With her, we went camping in France and the Scottish Highlands, sought out castles, windmills and stately homes, and trekked to the sights of London. It was Gloria who took me to my first Wimbledon, in 1975, where we cheered Virginia Wade into the quarter-finals from standing room on Centre Court, having risen in the small hours to queue.
When we were children, she drove us into the West End to see the Christmas lights on Regent Street – a moment of heart-stopping excitement. I doubt even the congestion charge would have deterred her.
As a young teacher, for a while she lived a charmed life in Egypt, full of sightseeing and dancing (including one memorable evening with President Tito of Yugoslavia, in town with his entourage). The joy of that time, which came to an abrupt end – via an alarming period of house arrest – with the Suez crisis, never left her. Three subsequent decades in the rough and tumble of education in the London borough of Hackney failed to drum it out of her.
When she died in 2008, we discovered a decade of letters between her and my mother, Laura, contrasting her adventures abroad with the concerns of 1950s domestic life back home: a suitcase of social history, which we later turned into a book. The aunt-shaped gap she left in all our Christmases and family events seems to grow, rather than diminish, with the years. As the photograph suggests, Gloria’s glass was always half full – and that, at least, I can remember.
Piers Ford
“Merry Christmas you suckers / You miserable men / That old festive season is with you again / You’ll be spending your money on cartloads of junk / And from here to New Year you’ll be drunk as a skunk”
When we were growing up, we (me and my three older sisters) were spoilt each Christmas. My mum and dad’s parents were both alive so, on Christmas Day we had dinner with my mum’s parents and that was followed by Christmas tea with our other granny and grandad.
This meant that, as is the tradition in Germany, we had our own Christmas tree on Christmas Eve. This included putting up and decorating the tree (no long lead-in for us) adorned with lighted candles clipped to the branches. It was a real tree, so the fire hazard was equally real but, hey, it was the early 60s and a Christmas tradition.
Another Christmas tradition was playing a 45rpm vinyl record while we decorated the tree. Playing it once was never enough. Merry Christmas, You Suckers by Paddy Roberts was released in 1962 but much of the content (apart from the reference to waiting for the nuclear blast, perhaps) is as relevant today as it was more than five decades ago. It summed up our family attitude to Christmas (or did the record come first?) but, above all, I have fond memories of my dad laughing heartily each time he heard it (then whistling the tune until Boxing Day). I think this is the reason I liked it so much.
Chris Lee
Rub the cooking fat into the flour until it is like breadcrumbs. Mix in the breadcrumbs, sugar, mixed fruit, mixed spice, ground nutmeg, apple, carrot and potato. Stir in the lemon juice. Dissolve the bicarbonate of soda into the warmed milk and stir this into the main mixture. Stir well and put in a basin, cover with greaseproof paper and steam for two and a half hours.
“This is a wartime recipe, but one my family prefers to the rich traditional kind,” stated my mother, Hilda Gladstone, in her contribution to the Cumbria-Westmorland WI cookbook published in 1978.
My sisters, cousins and nieces make this recipe every Christmas to keep the family tradition alive.
Sadly, Hilda died in her 80th year in 1996. However, many of her descendants, family and friends gathered in Cumbria in September 2016 for a weekend to celebrate what would have been her 100th birthday. In pride of place on the first evening was a Christmas pudding that I made to Hilda’s recipe, accompanied by lashings of Cumberland rum butter (in a Gladstone pottery sugar bowl, of course), cream and custard.
For the Cumberland rum butter, melt 225g (8oz) butter with 340g (12oz) soft brown sugar and add a teaspoon of ground nutmeg. Pour in half a wine glass of rum and mix well until it starts to thicken. Pour into an attractive old china bowl.
On the Sunday afternoon, a garden party saw 45 people tucking into my elder sister’s scones with homemade raspberry and blackcurrant jams, my younger sister’s thumb-hole tarts and Hilda’s “chocolate stuff” (tiffin), my Bakewell tarts and Victoria sponges, my cousin’s “nutty slack” (origin unsure, but contains cornflakes and nuts!) and other such specialities from Hilda’s farm table, WI cookbooks and the Be-Ro home-baking book.
Also on show during the weekend were many of Hilda’s exquisite examples of canvas work and rugs (all her own designs) plus string (baler twine) mats and craftwork. Each of these had been given as heirlooms, but only after they had been exhibited in WI competitions at various local shows.
Joy Gladstone
We will pay £25 for every Letter to, Playlist, Snapshot or We Love to Eat we publish. Write to Family Life, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU or email family@theguardian.com. Please include your address and phone number.
My first Christmas in Britain was in 1979. I was nine. London was more monochrome then than it is now but, suddenly, unexpectedly, in December, it decked itself out in lights and sparkled with the magic of Christmas. People sang in the streets and smiled at strangers, a different place from the reserved city in which we had arrived only six months before, having fled the revolution in Iran.
We were living in a small flat that was the opposite of our house in Tehran with its rose garden and fruit trees, waiting for real life to recommence. At that point, we still thought that everything would blow over and that we would soon return to our country. In the meantime, while treading water in London, my parents sent us to a language school to learn English and for the first time that winter, Christmas properly penetrated my consciousness.
Back then, Christmas started some time in December, when modest decorations appeared in the shops and the lights went on in high streets, not immediately after Halloween, as now. In fact, it crept up on us and we only decided to get a Christmas tree and decorate the flat after mid-December had passed.
In Iran, Christmas wasn’t part of our calendar. Our nextdoor neighbours had been a Christian Armenian family, their blond boys my best friends. They had celebrated in January, and I had always wished them happy Christmas, not quite sure what it really meant. For us Iranians, the big festival of the year is Noruz, Iranian new year on the vernal equinox around 21 March. We knew about Father Christmas and the tree through films and books from the west, but 25 December, falling as it did in the middle of winter months far from the end of the Iranian year, went by unnoticed. In fact, on what was Christmas Day, we were at school.
My first Christmas experience was kick-started by a school visit to Oxford Street in London to see the lights and look at Selfridges’ Christmas windows. The department store’s grand facade was lit up and decked with little Christmas trees, the vitrines adorned in miniature scenes of winter, each telling a story, minute figures ranged around snowy settings busy acting out the festive narrative, which spilled from one window to the next. I remember the crowds and pushing my way through them to press my face as close to the windows as I could. I was enchanted, and talked about it with such wonder at home later that we visited again as a family. Thus was born our first Christmas tradition – the annual festive visit to see the lights on Oxford Street and gasp at Selfridges’ windows.
After that, my parents decided that it would be nice for us kids to celebrate Christmas, despite not being Christian. They wanted us to feel part of this new society we were inhabiting, and they wanted to cheer us up. Although none of us ever talked about it, we were all engulfed in depression at so abruptly leaving home, traumatised at being separated from family and friends. Christmas gave us a chance to put the fear behind us, to celebrate the sanctuary that Britain had given us by adopting its most important festival. My mother went to Harrods to buy a tree – the destination to find anything she wasn’t quite sure about in those first months – bringing home a box of baubles and multicoloured tinsel, too. My sister and I happily decorated the tree – a real one whose abundance of needles we found speared through socks for months after. They were so prolific that it was the last real tree we had.
Christmas did cheer us up in that lonely first year in London. My sister and I were thrilled at the prospect of receiving presents – it was the first morning since arriving in London that I can remember waking up excited. And my parents were distracted by inventing new traditions and rituals for us to embrace. My mother learned how to cook a turkey so well that, to this day, there is nothing more delicious to me than her Christmas lunch, and we gathered around the television to watch the Queen’s message.
The years passed, things didn’t blow over in Iran and we stayed in London. Now, once a year, I, too, sing in the streets and smile at strangers. And we still visit Selfridges’ Christmas windows each December as an expanded family, accompanied now by my partner and his children, too.
I was still young enough to harbour a hope that Santa might be flying from the north pole to my hometown in northern England, that his reindeers might soon swoop through the murky skies of Manchester, bringing me everything I had wished for, when I placed a mince pie, a carrot and a glass of milk beneath the chimney of my childhood home. I had, after all, been quite a good girl.
As I waited and wished through the night, I wondered about the existence of Santa, God and the tooth fairy. And I wondered why was I – a brown girl, who had not long before lit sparklers to celebrate Diwali, the Hindu festival of light – now waiting for Santa, after helping my mother to decorate the tree with stars, baubles and a crowning angel? Some stories are of such force in the imagination that they cut through religion, race and class, achieving universality.
Christmas was a tale of two homes for me, as my parents divorced when I was five. Sometimes, after mornings at home with my mother, my father would collect us and take us to my grandmother’s house. She lived above her shop that curved around a corner of Stretford near Lancashire’s cricket ground. She worked in the shop most days, but – like everything back in those days – it was closed for Christmas.
My grandmother had 27 grandchildren, and would shop at the Asian textile warehouses in Manchester for gifts for the grandkids, many of whom made her living room the epicentre of the world for Christmas. Over the festive period, as well as turkey we would eat Indian food – dal and rice and burfi (an Indian sweet) from the “curry mile” in Rusholme. In that same living room, I had recently acted out the part of Hanuman the monkey god in the ancient Indian epic the Ramayana, which my cousins, siblings and I play-acted. I had leapt across the living room, which was transformed by the imagination into a giant lake.
Such stories from different cultures made me aware of a world of narratives, rich and varied, that can coexist in the imagination. I was variously an angel in a nativity play and a monkey god in an Indian epic. I loved The Snowman as a child, especially the soundtrack, and every year I’d watch that (and attempt to build a real one if enough snow fell), along with films on TV such as Back to the Future, as well as the classic Indian film Disco Dancer, which often played at my grandmother’s house.
Christmas was ubiquitous, so it was difficult not to partake: at school, carols were sung, the nativity play acted, Advent calendars opened. But friendships were also forged across cultural divides throughout the year, so I have memories of attending friends’ barmitzvahs, for example.
The year was a blend of light and dark; Diwali celebrations exploded into bonfire night and melted into Christmas, which also entailed an annual visit to the glittering Blackpool illuminations and bright balls in the Funhouse. Then, after the bleak new year, the wash of colours of Holi, the festival of spring.
These days, I am not religious, though my extended family has many religions in it. My brother’s wife is Muslim, so my nieces, Asha and Layla, and nephew Hari celebrate Eid, too, to add to the array of annual festivities. On Christmas Eve, my nieces will also lay out a mince pie, carrot and glass of milk for Santa and his reindeers, and write him a letter. This year I’m hoping to read to them from The Girl Who Saved Christmas by Matt Haig – because celebrating Christmas is also about storytelling. As the far right takes hold across the world, the ability to recognise and appreciate varying viewpoints and sharing stories from different cultures is vital. Stories can be the greatest of all gifts.
“They tried to kill us, we escaped, let’s eat.”
This cheery summary of Jewish festivals may distress you. You may prefer the December holidays to be a season of light-hearted consumerism, when we mark the birth of Jesus by telling children that an obese, sherry-loving bachelor will climb into their houses at night and leave small gifts in hosiery. Surely there should be no place for death, or darkness?
Perhaps you’re right. But how else are Jews to face the fact that all our festivals commemorate attempts to exterminate us? How can we teach our children sweet little songs about Passover or Hanukah without mentioning the point of it all: slavery, plagues, oppression, bloodshed?
As all parents know, the answer is distraction. Give the kids enough sugar, in the form of cake or, better yet, anything deep-fried, and they’ll accept whatever you tell them. It’s a festive miracle. And it works.
Luckily for British Jews, the birthday of the infant redeemer is also about eating. This may be a godless, post-truth age, but the average Christmas table still groans with the foodstuffs of yesteryear: Bailey’s Pumpkin Spice liqueur, eggnog ice cream and gluten-free Thai-style stuffing. So it shouldn’t be difficult to create a fusion, should it? Particularly this year when, spookily, the first night of Hanukah and Christmas Eve coincide? Hanumas, Christukah (we’ll argue later): a perfect combination of latkes, mincemeat, stilton, When Harry Met Sally and only the most raucous carols. That’s the way, in adulthood, I play it. For my Jewish atheist parents, forging a secular path in 1970s Oxford, things were more complicated.
My Church of England primary school was hardcore about Christmas, so it was unfortunate when Hanukah coincided with the end of the Christmas term. After a long day of holy baby Jesus, I would barely have the energy to light the multicoloured candles my father bore proudly home from Paddington. Then the trouble would begin. My mother disapproved of Hanukah but, in the unsoundable depths of their marriage, a compromise had been reached. While my father speed-read prayers she would sit, arms crossed, rolling her eyes and saying: “Maurice! How much longer?” Then we’d sing Maoz Tsur, a mysterious festive song. No presents, no games, no sweeties.
What of the other cultural highlights? Our Christmas tree was a Swiss cheese plant wound with tinsel; our only real tradition was the construction of a cardboard Hansel and Gretel house from a kit, which we would plaster thickly with icing and then watch as the Lebkuchen slid off. Carols were awkward: too many references to “captive Israel”. I would bow my head and mime. And what to do about nativity plays? Just how Jewish was Joseph allowed to be?
The holy day itself was much like that of normal families. At least, normal north Oxford families. We would open stockings stuffed with pre-tangled Slinky springs and strawberry-scented pencils; we would wrest the paper from rollerskates (for my sister) and, for me, encyclopedias and, one glorious festive morn, a Texas Instruments Little Professor calculator on which I could perfect my maths.
Obviously, we had to eat. Ceremoniously, my father would make his best, indeed only, breakfast: real orange-juice, from frozen concentrate, and bubaleh, a sweetened omelette, the legacy of his Polish father. Then, while my grandmother started basting, he would take us to Port Meadow, the ancient common land that was the closest we ever came to wilderness. If one ignored the snowy thistles and horse droppings, it was a virginal, Arctic paradise, particularly the year when we fashioned skis out of red Formica planks from a skip and, on the slope-free grass, pretended to be having the time of our lives.
Better (worse) still was skating. Occasionally, the meadow flooded, then froze. My father, imagining himself as Goethe, bought a pair of ice skates at a jumble sale; they fitted none of us. That was the least of our problems. The ice was ridged with frozen tussocks; there was nothing to hold on to. While other children executed camel spins, we would take it in turns to inch towards the murky edge, ankles twisting, fingers raw, fail to stand up and eventually, sobbing, be allowed home.
Then, hosannah, we could eat. In another confusing shift from, or towards, tradition, our Christmas meal was goose, red cabbage, stollen, walnuts and marzipan. It was 19th-century Transcarpathia, apart from the occasional beeps from the handheld Game & Watch hand-sets my early-adopter grandmother had bought, and my muffled sobbing about my score on the Little Professor.
I have moved on, somewhat. At Hanumas I give books, but also large plastic electronic items; we have roast beef, red cabbage, and Cadbury’s Heroes; there is tinsel. We sing a quick bastardised chorus of Maoz Tsur, but I still don’t have the faintest idea what it means. We eat and argue. It’s the perfect Hanumas.
1. Don’t take pictures of your presents. Christmas is a minefield of potentially botched etiquette, and social media only makes it worse. And, clearly, the crime one can commit is making a fuss online about all the stuff you have been given. Look, we get it. You got a lot of presents this year. What are you, six? Ask yourself why you are doing this. Is it for likes? Is that it? How much extra validation do you need anyway, you weirdo? Someone just bought you a nice coat, and that should be enough. Now go away and think about what you’ve done.
2. It is acceptable to post a photo of your family in lieu of sending Christmas cards. Christmas cards are a pain in the bum, which is why you didn’t send any this year. They are expensive and bad for the environment, and there’s a good chance you’ll forget someone and then feel bad about it for ever. Instead, just take a picture of you and your loved ones, caption it “Merry Christmas”, and stick it on Facebook. It has exactly the same effect. Don’t worry about friends and relatives who don’t have Facebook. They don’t deserve your kind gestures.
3. Stop checking your phone all the time. Not only is it rude to spend Christmas Day staring blankly into the palm of your hand, but also it invites scrutiny you just don’t need. This is bitter experience talking here. I spent a lot of time on my phone one Christmas when Twitter was relatively new, and then had to spend the bulk of the day trying to explain to my family what Twitter was, what the point of it was, and why it wasn’t a stupid waste of everyone’s time. It is a stupid waste of everyone’s time, but that’s not the point.
4. In fact, put your phone away completely. Your phone is junk today. The only emails you’ll get will be horrific “Merry Christmas from GlaxoSmithKline! Here’s 5% off your next bulk purchase of Poligrip Ultra!” marketing newsletters, and all they’ll do is make you angry because they’re actively flushing the spirit of Christmas down the toilet. Just put it away. I promise you won’t miss anything.
5. Don’t Instagram your dinner. Instagramming dinner in a fancy restaurant I get. But leave Christmas dinner alone. What’s that? You’re having turkey, potatoes and vegetables? Well, guess what? So is literally everyone else. So don’t bother showing us. If I wanted to endlessly endure a slow trickle of gravy, I’d move three doors down from the cat-food factory.
6. No creepshotting drunk relatives. Yes, sure, it’s funny that your grandfather ate too much pudding and fell into the Christmas tree and the dog pulled his trousers down, but that doesn’t mean you have to take a photo of it and show it to the world. Certainly not without asking his permission first. Where photos are concerned, treat your relatives like strangers on the bus. Would you publish a photo of a stranger on a bus? You would? You monster.
7. You are permitted to tweet, but only infrequently on Christmas afternoon. Christmas afternoon is a wasteland. You’re too full to move, and too drunk to try, and this is the time of day where all the carefully observed politeness about basic acceptance flies straight out of the window. By 4pm, your dad will have started to tell the room loudly why Brexit was a good idea, and this will be your time to escape down the rabbit hole of the internet. Forget about likes or favourites or retweets, you should spend this time passive-aggressively howling at a wall of uninterested strangers. The survival of your family depends on it.
8. Don’t complain about any of this on Twitter. This is an important one to remember. If you see loads of people Instagramming their potatoes or tweeting about all their presents, or committing any other sort of festive social-media crime, keep it to yourself. Because if there’s one thing that ruins Christmas more than self-absorption, it’s pedantry. There’s a time and a place for that sort of behaviour, and that’s in a newspaper article that you’re getting paid to write.
Asking a roomful of people to pray for my testicles was a turning point in our journey towards having children. In the dark days of our childlessness and IVF treatment, my wife, Anna, and I began to seek every intercession we could lay our hands on. Then there were the prayers who actually did lay on hands. Although thankfully not directly on the affected area.
To use its wonderful medical term, I have oligozoospermia. It means I have a ridiculously low sperm count. I am a “jaffa” – seedless. We produce fewer than 15m sperm per millilitre of semen. It is believed to affect about 9% of men in the UK.
According to the National Fertility Association, the average man produces anything between 40m to 300m sperm per millilitre of semen. I am therefore, in this respect at least, a way below average man. Way, way below.
When I eventually plucked up the courage to get tested, my doctor told me over the phone that they had found only 37 in the semen sample.
“Thirty seven million – that’s not too bad is it?” I asked.
In the space of that conversation, I felt I’d had a vital piece of my masculinity – and one of the great gifts of manhood – ripped from me. I was bereft. The testicles that I believed were occupied by an army of supercharged Michael Phelpses, primed and ready to create babies when the time came, actually housed a pathetic handful of inebriated Eric the Eels.
I felt God had dealt me a cruel blow. That he had somehow diminished me as a man. My prayers became increasingly angry, confrontational and self-pitying. “Why me, Lord?” was a question I often asked.
Of course, up to that point, our struggles to conceive were not my fault. Consumed by a kind of “proud man syndrome”, I insisted that it must be an issue with Anna’s internal workings. Only after her various tests and proddings came up clear, did I eventually agree to give a sample. Thirty-seven poor swimming sperm would not get the job done.
I masked my despair pretty well. I made light of it, joked my way through. At one particularly lively birthday bash, I even took to the stage to spontaneously rap about my condition. There was pain behind those unrepeatable rhymes, though.
Low sperm counts are becoming far more common now. In the past 30 years, the quality and number of sperm has declined among UK men. Drinkers, smokers and stress-heads are said to be at greater risk. As someone who indulges in a glass of red, sucked in the fumes of countless Regal Kingsize until my mid-20s, and lives permanently on his nerves, I am a prime candidate. Or maybe I was just born this way. Who knows? The sad fact is that for such a common medical issue, too few men want to admit it, talk about it or even believe it could be affecting them. They suffer in quiet desperation.
One of the reasons for opening up my diaries in my new book, Becoming Reverend, was to seek to lift this veil of embarrassed secrecy. I reckoned that if I overshared the key moments of our IVF journey – and living in a spermless marriage – then perhaps other blokes would have the balls (albeit malfunctioning ones) to unburden themselves.
Let me be clear from the outset: IVF treatment is far more hideous for women. There are the drugs they have to inject, the yo-yoing emotions, the number of times their legs have to be attached to stirrups while medics examine and extract and insert things. It is our wives and partners who feel the pain most acutely when the treatment doesn’t work, not to mention the intense worry when it does. My wife noticed every tummy bubble, gurgle and burp, hoping against hope that it was the sound of a new life stirring in her womb.
As men, I think our suffering takes on a different hue. IVF stripped away my ingrained sense of male pride and dignity. It left me exposed, afraid and utterly dependent. I observed all manner of men when I attended my fertility clinic. But we all had the same pale, haunted look as we waited for our names to be called to the dreaded sperm donation room. I still wince at the memory of going in there for the first time with my plastic pot.
Once the deed was done, I was instructed to wait in the corridor until a nurse came to collect the pot. “It’s vital you keep the contents warm, though, Mr Woodcock,” they added. So I stood mannequin-like for what felt like days, smiling nervously at the passers-by, praying my semen-filled receptacle was getting enough heat stuffed down the front of my jeans.
Embarrassing, humiliating, and yet, for us, after three rounds of IVF, absolutely worth it. To hear the words, “You are pregnant!” To witness the two flashing heartbeats on the screen at our first scan. And then to finally hold, nine months later, two lives we had created. They were indescribable, life-transforming, miraculous moments. Whether it was a spiritual or purely medical miracle I can’t say with any certainty. That’s the point of faith, I suppose – it’s a mystery. It was probably a bit of both. All those prayers, all that medical skill, for me, combined to create Esther and Heidi.
I often wonder about the consequences of the IVF not working. I’m sure our marriage would have survived, flourished even. We’d have gathered ourselves, got on with it, and sought the next adventure. But our lives would always have had a space where children were meant to be.
As for my male identity, in a profound way, IVF taught me a new way of being. Out of my weakness I found a renewed strength. My masculinity was not somehow restored when Anna got pregnant. I didn’t break out into a chest-beating roar when the twins were born. It was actually the stripping away of some of my selfish pride, the fresh reliance on my faith in the face of hopeless despair, and the willingness to share those hurting places with the people I love and trust. That shapes my masculinity now.
It’s six years now since Esther and Heidi were born and the dog collar went round my neck. In that time, I have occasionally been called upon to minister to couples struggling with infertility. It has helped – I hope – that I can relate to their pain. I can empathise with their situation. My prayers for them are born out of real and at times bitter experience. That said, I’m also acutely aware that our IVF success may add to the confusion and frustration of those couples I’m supporting who remain childless. “Why does God not bless us with a miracle?” is a question I have been asked. It’s maddening that I don’t have an easy answer to it. I don’t believe one exists. I passionately believe God comforts us in our times of greatest distress – but why he intervenes sometimes and not at others remains baffling to me.
One of the great joys of becoming a priest has been the opportunity to encourage the blokes in my flock to open up a bit about such things as infertility. Not in a holding-hands-in-a-candlelit-circle-while-meditating-to-whale-music kind of way. That wouldn’t work in the centre of Hull. Instead, I run a men’s group where we laugh and share and banter about the stuff that matters and hurts. And I offer prayer, even when things seem lost and hopeless. In fact, especially then.
• Becoming Reverend: A Diary by Matt Woodcock is published by Church House Publishing, £9.99
Being a good guest starts before you arrive. Reply to any invitation as promptly as you can. (If you can’t accept, say so early.) The answer to any invitation is yes or no; you don’t have to share issues with how you’ll get there, babysitters/parking/travel/what you’ll do with Granny and the dog. Talking of which, don’t ask if you can bring extra guests or pets who weren’t invited – that bit is your job to deal with.
1. The best guests are … hosts. No one has the potential to understand what is needed of a guest and how to behave more than those who regularly invite people into their own house. The worst guests are those who never reciprocate and never have guests round themselves. These are the people who think it is OK to ask an already busy host for a 33rd cup of tea and act as if they have checked into a hotel. Prefixing everything with “do you mind if we have?” does not make it better.
2. Never turn up empty-handed unless you are visiting the house of someone whom you also regularly host. Saying “I didn’t know where the local supermarket was” or “we came on the train” are poor excuses for laziness and lack of organisation. You do not need to spend loads (although a well-picked personal hamper always goes down well if you are staying overnight, but avoid chutneys because good hosts always have at least 15 different chutneys and they really don’t need more).
3. Do not bring food that has to be consumed during your stay but underestimates the number of people it has to feed. Unless it’s cheese. Do not have a complicated, indulgent list of what you or your children won’t eat. Unless you are allergic to something, the correct response to any food likes is “we eat everything and anything and are grateful for it”. Your host is unlikely to cook tripe and liver unless they hate you. And if there is something you don’t like, you don’t have to eat it.
4. When food is served, if there is something you don’t like, just shut up and avoid it. You don’t have to announce to the whole room that you will only eat line-caught fish, organic raspberries or that it’s “not your favourite” (I have done this, and cringe when I remember). Do not – ever – say the words “eating clean”. If you want a menu to choose from, go to a restaurant and pay for it.
5. Do not spend the whole time you are there on your phone. No one is that important. Do not bicker with your partner, children or anyone else in the party. Do not use this opportunity to espouse your political views or call Jesus into the fray. If you are a bad drunk, don’t drink. And if you plan to drink loads (but are a good drunk), bring some (good) booze. Do not use this opportunity to have a go at the host and ask why they are not married/don’t have children yet.
6. Make a positive comment on something to do with the house. Lie if you have to. Saying nothing, especially if it’s the first time you have been to someone’s house, is pretty shabby. Even if you ache with jealousy, find it deep in your core to say something nice. Passive-aggressive comments such as “this house must be a lot of work” just make you look very sad.
7. If you do drink lots of tea/coffee, ask if you can be shown how to make your own and offer others one, too – especially your host. Use the same cup each time, otherwise your host will have a nervous breakdown.
8. When the host sits down after a meal, this is probably their one pit stop before it all starts again for the next meal. Do not use this time to ask if your child can have a ham sandwich because “they didn’t eat much at lunch”. Tough.
9. Offer to do the washing up and bring your plate into the kitchen unless your host has asked you not to (some people don’t like anyone else in their kitchen). This isn’t so relevant if you regularly visit each other’s houses.
10. Leave when you said you would. If you are fussy about bedding, bring your own. Bring extra layers if you are visiting someone in the country. Don’t ask if they can turn the heating up (or on). Do star jumps.
11. Smile and enjoy yourself. The lowest impact guests are the ones who leave everyone feeling good, either by helping, or not hindering. If you get an invite back, you’ll know.
It is Saturday, the day I have set aside to buy the Christmas tree. All my sons are home and still in bed, and I have a vague plan to recreate a happy family expedition from days gone by, even though no such event ever occurred. I cherish my Christmas memories; I’m just not sure who they belong to.
“Wake up,” I say to the youngest one, driving my big toe into the small of his back as he sleeps. “It’s Christmas tree day.”
“It’s going to be fun,” I say. “Father-son-type fun.”
“Use a different son,” he says. “I’m ill.” I move on to the next room.
“No!” the middle one says, from under his duvet.
“It’ll be fun,” I say. “Fun, and compulsory.”
“Get someone else,” he says.
None of the sounds emerging from the other side of the oldest one’s door are intelligible. He was always the least likely prospect. I go downstairs to find my wife. “Christmas is cancelled,” I say.
“You could always go and get a tree by yourself,” she says.
“It’ll be rammed today, anyway,” she says. “You and I can just go on Tuesday.”
When Tuesday arrives, bleak and wet, I’m hoping my wife has forgotten about the tree. She can be irrepressibly festive on such occasions, and it always makes me feel as if I’m ruining Christmas. But she hasn’t forgotten.
We drive to the same church car park where we always buy our tree. We stare at the sign explaining how the different conifers are priced according to height.
“I hate this sort of thing,” my wife says.
‘What are you talking about?” I say. “You love this sort of thing.”
“Five years ago, we embarked on this exact errand, and you were insufferably jolly. Fact.” In truth, all our past Christmas expeditions are a blur. How many trees have we bought, decorated and disposed of?
“What about that one?” my wife says, pointing.
“Are you just saying that so we can leave?” she says.
“No,” I say. “That is indisputably the best tree here.” I pick it up and twirl it.
“OK,” my wife says, “I’ll get someone.”
As I stand there holding the tree, the sun comes out and my mood begins to lighten. There’s no point in both of us ruining Christmas, I think. It takes only one.
As we pay for the tree, something occurs to me. “We need a new stand,” I say. “We got rid of the old one after last Christmas.”
I’m not sure. I may have thrown it away, or it may still be sitting in the shed, full of dead spiders.
“Yes,” I say, selecting a new heavy-duty stand and placing it on the counter. “We did.”
“How much is that one?” my wife says.
“Don’t worry,” I say. “It’s an investment. It will last a lifetime.”
“We don’t need it to last a lifetime,” she says. “We don’t need anything that lasts that long.”
Our tree is netted and waiting for us outside. I hoist it over my shoulder. The whole expedition has taken seven minutes. I find this very pleasing: what we lack in Christmas spirit we make up for in brisk efficiency.
“We just need to go to Sainsbury’s now,” my wife says as we get into the car.
“Needs must,” she says. “There’s no food.”
I look behind me. The tree, pointing nose-first between the front seats, looks like a frozen dolphin. “OK,” I say. “But what if someone sees us?”
1 Start the day with a good bacon sandwich. You’ll be knocking back the champagne, so it’s sensible to get something in your stomach to get you through.
Rosie Birkett
2 Make sure your bird will fit in the oven and you have a roasting dish large enough. Seriously, it’s happened to me before – big bird, small oven. One year, our oven broke, too. We ended up carving up the raw turkey and stir-frying it. 
Rachel Kelly
3 Less is more if you’re hosting Christmas for the first time. You don’t have to do it all, menu-wise or physically. Delegate to survive! Anyone who likes to chat, give them some peeling and they can talk to you at the same time. Give your creative friends the job of dressing the table and the person you like least the washing-up. Only joking. 
Melissa Hemsley
4 Be prepared. Everyone laughed at it, but for me making a Gantt chart was key to learning how to cook a big Christmas lunch on time. Work backwards from your intended serving time and be realistic about how long peeling veg etc will take. pchan, via GuardianWitness
5 Don’t try to cram everything into the same oven. The turkey should rest for an hour, loosely covered in tin foil and tea towels, giving you an empty oven in which to roast potatoes and other trimmings. 
jamesE1, via GuardianWitness
6 Don’t truss the bird – keep the legs loose and hanging free. The leg bones conduct the heat through the thighs, which take more cooking than the breast meat. If you truss it, by the time the legs are cooked, the breast meat will be dry. 
Peter Gordon
7 Make your stuffing in advance and refrigerate it. Sweat onions and celery for 15 minutes, add breadcrumbs that have had an hour to soak up full-fat milk, stick in an egg or two, and use butcher’s sausage meat with an unconscionable amount of salt. Sage should be fresh rather than dried, which is disgusting. 
PaperAxe, via GuardianWitness
8 Don’t skimp on the gravy – in my family there is never enough. My brother only makes gravy from the cooking juices, so by the time his children have flooded their plates with this precious liquor, I’m left with a couple of dabs. I always make a simple chicken gravy a few days before, bolstered up with mushrooms, thyme and sherry, and then blended smooth. It’s ready to go as is, and I then add the roasting juices. If you are really pushed for time, there is a brilliant instant madeira gravy mix from Crosse & Blackwell. Speaking of which, don’t be embarrassed about using the supermarket or other sources of readymade food. 
Rachel Kelly
9 Add some redcurrant jelly to your gravy. I make my own jelly every year, but you can buy it. Thicken the meat juices with cornflour and add a big glug of red wine and some stock – a cube is fine. When the gravy is cooked through, add a couple of tablespoons of jelly, taste and adjust the seasoning. Great gravy every time.
LoveintheMist, via GuardianWitness
10 For extra-crispy roasties, add half a teaspoon of baking soda to the water in which you boil them. The higher pH breaks the pectin down more quickly, giving you fluffier edges and more surface area to crisp up. 
Andrew Surrey, via GuardianWitness
11 Cooks’ muslin will keep your turkey moist. It needs to be big enough to double and go over the turkey – a metre should do it. Melt a pack of butter in a large pan and soak the muslin in it. Season the turkey, putting more butter and seasoning or herbs under the skin. Drape the muslin over the turkey to enclose it completely. 
astephanides, via GuardianWitness
12 Gin is the solution. Just when things started to get stressful, oven smoking and pans bubbling, my dad would pour me the strongest G&T imaginable. Then I didn’t care if anyone liked their dinner or not. 
lizmunstone, via GuardianWitness
What were you hoping for? 
A first chat that wasn’t stilted Tinder fare.
First impressions? 
Charming, warm and pretty easy on the eye.
What did you talk about? 
Family, Christmas, our plans for the future, and the queen herself: JK Rowling.
Any awkward moments? 
He doesn’t drink coffee, which was quite the reveal, but by that point in the evening, he’d built up enough good karma.
Best thing about James? 
Damn, that man’s a conversationalist.
Would you introduce him to your friends? 
There are friends I’m sure he’d get along with.
Describe him in three words 
Erudite, pleasant, groomed (in a good way).
What do you think he made of you? 
I don’t think I set his world alight. Which is fine. Nobody is meant for everyone.
Did you go on somewhere? 
We called it a night after dessert.
And... did you kiss? 
Only on the cheek.
If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be? 
Nothing. It was a pretty solid night.
Would you meet again? 
He’s a great guy, but I think we’d be better off as friends. I look forward to receiving his press releases.
What were you hoping for?
Someone fun and chatty.
First impressions?
Super-welcoming and polite, but I knew straight away he wasn’t my usual type.
What did you talk about?
Work, family, hobbies, movies.
Any awkward moments?
A couple of awkward silences. I knew then this was nothing more than a nice meal.
Best thing about David?
His stories about New York.
Would you introduce him to your friends? 
I’d be more than happy to.
Describe him in three words
Intelligent, polite, friendly.
What do you think he made of you?
We had a fair bit in common, which I think he liked a lot.
Did you go on somewhere?
No.
And... did you kiss?
No.
If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?
That it had been a Friday: I’d have liked more cocktails.
Would you meet again?
I don’t think we would, no.
Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com. For a free three-day trial of Soulmates, go to soulmates.theguardian.com/subscribe/blinddate
Christmas, says the poet Lemn Sissay, divides the world into two sorts of people. One group gathers around the domestic hearth: all jocularity and teasing, memories and traditions. The other group is, as in the Victorian cliche, outside the window looking in. They have never felt the warmth of the homely festive glow.
Most of us have families who, even if it’s with some reservation, we join for Christmas. We roll our eyes and sigh, we anticipate the annoyances; we steel ourselves for the nuances that only we could ever understand.
Sissay, though, is a member of the second group. He was raised in care, first in a foster family and then, from the age of 12, in a string of children’s homes. Christmas came with the tree and the fairy lights, the baubles and the presents, but all those other unseen ingredients – the real flavours of the season – were absent; all those essentials that, as the Grinch finally realised, can’t be bought from a shop.
Given what he’s missed, it would be understandable if Sissay were resentful and scathing about how thoughtlessly the rest of us sometimes complain about something so vital and yet unknown to him. But he is not – he is magnanimous.
Yes, he agrees, all the things we take for granted about a family Christmas are a luxury. “They are a luxury, and you do take them for granted. But so you should, and so we all should be able to. We don’t walk around saying: ‘I’m breathing.’ But take your breath away, and you soon realise that you’re utterly dependent on it – and that’s the closest I can get to describing what a family does for you. Everything in life is connected, and everything is connected to family. People say: ‘If you’ve got no family, you can always have friends.’ But what they don’t understand is that your friendship-making skills are themselves connected to being part of a family.”
Sissay was awarded the MBE for services to literature in 2010. He is the chancellor of the University of Manchester, and in 2012 he was the official Olympics poet. “I probably look like a success,” he muses. “I seem like an achiever, someone who’s done well in life. But it’s an idea I’ve always struggled with. Because, when it comes down to it, who gives a shit whether I’m chancellor of a university? Who really cares?”
The people who would care, who always care, would be family; and that caring and that noticing and that reflecting who we are and what we have become is as intrinsic to this time of year as the presents under the tree. Christmas is a moment to pause, to look back, not just year on year but across a lifetime. And it’s about the future, too.
“Families are about the power of suggestion,” says Sissay. “When are you going to get married? When are you going to get a new job? All those questions that are a pain in the backside are also a wake-up call, a prompt.”
Sissay was born in 1967 to a young Ethiopian woman who discovered she was pregnant soon after arriving in England. She asked for him to be fostered while she finished her studies. Instead, the arrangement continued until Sissay was 12, at which point his foster family gave him up, and he was sent to a children’s home. From there, he was moved from one home to another, usually the only black kid wherever he was resident.
He was rootless; an unwanted parcel. And Christmas, as for any kid in care, was the hardest time: when the festive lights served only to expose what was missing, and would never be there. “It feels an incredibly risky time,” he says. “I used to fold myself into myself. All the memories were of Christmases that hadn’t been good.”
The truth about family, Sissay agrees, is this: its platform and its web, its support and its structures, are extraordinarily difficult to replicate in any other setting. Extraordinarily difficult, but not impossible: and yet the gap between what family life provides and what a life in care provides is a yawning chasm.
“‘Care’ is a one-word oxymoron,” he says, a flash of anger in his face. “If we were to truly replicate what a family is for the child who’s being looked after by the state, if the state was truly to provide that, it would give them the best of everything.”
But what society gives the kids is not the best; it’s the dregs. “After I left care, I was always being asked: ‘What did you do wrong?’ There’s this Victorian idea that there must be something bad about you if you end up in care. ‘If you’re naughty, we’ll send you to the children’s home’ … that kind of mentality.”
Sissay is fired up now. He is furious, not only for himself but for the hundreds of thousands like him, kids who grew up in this misnomer of a system. “Do you know the worst thing they said to me, the people who were in charge, when I was in care? They said: ‘What do you want? What do you want, Lemn?’ Those fuckers! How dare they! They had the gall to turn round to a kid and say: ‘What do you want?’ The whole care system is flawed, deeply flawed, and hopelessly unimaginative. I get so irritated when I hear people saying to children in care: ‘Why don’t you become a social worker when you grow up, so you can change things?’ How little imagination do these people have? Why should children in care become social workers … we’re not feedback machines for the system that fucked us up.”
So where should change begin? “I’d look at the nature of a functioning family and work out how we can replicate that for kids in the care system. One of the worst things that happened for me was that the big thing I needed was a hug, and a hug was the last thing I ever got. When you’re in care you’re acutely aware of how you’re not love or pleasure for anyone – you’re an obligation. Your social worker is just that – a worker. She or he is being paid. However brilliant your relationship with your social worker is, for them it’s a job. To you, it’s your life. And when you leave care, your social worker is no longer allowed to have contact with you. How does that feel for a young person?”
Sissay left care three decades ago, but he says you don’t leave it behind – part of you is always that rootless kid, that person with no one to chivvy or complain about, no one to boast to or moan about. And while he is not sure whether he would count much of his life’s work as achievements, there is one thing he is incredibly proud of. It is his Christmas present to hundreds of young people who, like him, have never had a family to be with at this time of the year. It’s called the Christmas Dinner, which he founded in 2013, and this year it promises a fabulous day to about 300 young care leavers aged 18 to 25 in five UK cities – London, Leeds, Manchester, Liverpool and Oxford.
The Christmas Dinner is run by volunteers, who persuade local businesses and organisations to donate food and services. Not just any food or services, though: only the best will do. Guests are picked up by taxi, and driven to one of the swankiest venues in town. Dinner is cooked by a leading chef, and the goody bags are stuffed with top-drawer gifts. “The thing is,” says Sissay, “I remember saying when I left care, ‘I don’t want to just survive. I want to live.’ And the Christmas Dinner isn’t about surviving; it’s about living.”
For the invitees, the event is life-changing. At one dinner last year, two sisters who hadn’t spent a Christmas together for seven years sat down side by side; another guest said that every year when the John Lewis ad was launched she felt really sad, but from now on, because of the Christmas Dinner, she wouldn’t have to. Megan Macleod, 21, who moved out of her foster home when she was 17, and who will be attending the Oxford meal, bursts into tears when I ask her what it will mean to her. “I just can’t believe they’re doing all this so we have a happy Christmas,” she says. “I’m super-excited for it.”
Of course, Sissay knows that one lunch, provided by one set of volunteers, shared by one group of care leavers, can’t provide everything that a family get-together does. But you only have to look at Megan’s face to see how much it means. And it isn’t only about the youngsters. “It’s about all the people who made it happen, getting them to think about care leavers and their lives,” says Sissay.
“Marks & Spencer has just agreed to give us the food, and there will be conversations happening there about what it means to be a young person in care. Up until now, some of those people probably thought care leavers equated to shoplifters. This might make them stop and think – because care leavers are incredible people. They are people with so many prejudices stacked against them. Their capacity for empathy is often extraordinary: they have to use other skills to make contact with the world, because they don’t have the skills people with families have.”
What about Sissay himself? He has never married, and has no children. He said he would never do that until he had found his birth family: but in his late 20s he did, and he is now in touch with his mother, who lives in New York. So yes, he says, he would love to settle down with someone; he would love children. He looks a bit startled by the question, as if it would be the gateway to a life that is still almost unimaginable. On the other hand, he now knows what matters.
“If I’m not defined by my success, I am defined by my ability to heal,” he says. “Because we’re all hurt, and we’re all healing.”
In 2017, The Christmas Dinner will be raising £100,000 for Christmas dinners throughout the country. Details are in The Seven Goals of Christmas blog; lemn@thechristmasdinner.org.uk
While Japanese families enjoy the Christmas Eve ritual of tucking into fried chicken and sponge cake, millions of love-struck, or simply lustful, couples will discreetly observe another festive tradition with a visit to a love hotel.
They will enter a dimly lit lobby and, after a brief discussion, select a room with the push of a button. Then, for just a few thousand yen ($25-30) – handed to an unseen receptionist – they will be free to make the most of their fleeting moment of privacy. As soon as they leave, a team of cleaners will prepare the room for the next occupants.
But Japan’s love hotels are suffering from a downturn in demand from amorous couples. Instead, they are pinning their hopes of long-term survival on a surge in the number of Chinese tourists that is stretching the traditional hotel industry to breaking point.
The backstreets of Tokyo’s Dogenzaka – nicknamed Love Hotel Hill – are quiet early on a weekday evening. But on Saturday, rooms at hotels with names like Amore, Elegance and Asian Resort will be at a premium as the industry cashes in on its busiest day of the year.
From huge, faux castles strategically located at motorway intersections to scruffy ferroconcrete boxes in the suburbs, love hotels offer not just privacy and anonymity, but an array of esoteric extras for couples hoping to spice up their love life.
If mirrored ceilings and vending machines selling sex toys are not their thing, guests can opt for “concept rooms” that re-create everything from the inside of an aircraft to tropical holiday resorts.
An estimated 1.4 million Japanese visit a love hotel every day, with rooms used by an average of 2.4 couples daily. Although there are no official data, analysts believe the industry is worth between 2-3 trillion yen ($17-25bn) a year.
Yet these are uncertain times for love hotels, so named after the first of their kind – Hotel Love – opened in Osaka in the late 1960s. The rise of single households and a decline in the population of 20-29 year olds – their target demographic – means there is less call for the role love hotels once played as an escape from extended families living under one roof.
“The love hotel business is going through a difficult time,” said Shigemi Sudo, director of the Tokyo Hotel and Ryokan (Inn) Association. “This is probably because more young people live away from their family home these days, so there’s no need for them to go to a love hotel.”
Helped by government subsidies, more love hotels are renovating their facilities to appeal to overseas visitors who may not want a room with a revolving bed and fluffy handcuffs.
A record 20 million tourists visited Japan this year, thanks to a weaker yen and groups of visitors from China, who make up just under a third of the total. Having reached that milestone four years ahead of schedule, the government has set an ambitious target of 40 million by the time Tokyo hosts the Olympics in 2020.
With international and tourists hotels unable to cope with demand, the accommodation gap is being filled by capsule hotels, backpackers’ hostels, Airbnb – and love hotels.
Eager to rid themselves of their association with purely carnal desires, some advertise themselves as boutique hotels or “urban resorts”. The number of hotels with an overtly sexual theme has dwindled to around 6,000 due to falling domestic demand and a 1985 law that required the industry to present a more wholesome image.
Dimly lit receptions have been replaced with cafeterias; in the rooms, tacky décor and vending machines selling sex toys have made way for bright colours and designer cosmetics.
Hotel Will in Saitama prefecture, for example, has retained its garish neon sign outside, but inside the pink wallpaper has been replaced with plain white, and the double beds with singles. A widescreen TV and refrigerator now take up space once occupied by huge mirrors. Only the well-appointed bathroom has been left untouched.
The hotel is packed with Chinese tourists, thanks to a contract with a Chinese travel agency giving it exclusive use for its clients.
“Many tourists don’t think love hotels are seedy at all,” said Mark Schreiber, a veteran writer on Japan’s sex industry. “Operators spend a fortune on fixtures, which are different in each room. One might be done out art deco-style, and the room next store might have a Renaissance theme.”
Hotel operator Manryo has turned three love hotels in Tokyo’s Asakusa district hotels into backpackers’ hostels by adding a bar and lounge. “It just so happened the love hotels became available to us after they got into financial difficulties,” said Manryo spokeswoman Erika Yamato.
Almex, meanwhile, advertises love hotel rooms to tourists via loveinnjapan.com. The English-language site includes a manga guide for first-time guests, and there are plans to launch versions in Korean and Chinese.
“Tourists are starting to use love hotels because regular hotels are fully booked, or sometimes just because they’ve heard that they are fun places to stay,” an Almex spokesman said.
Rooms that can be rented for a few hours at a time have been around in Japan since the Edo period (1603-1868). The first modern love hotels appeared in the 1960s to cater to couples desperate to escape their extended families, who traditionally lived under one roof, for a few hours of intimacy.
An Osaka-based association of small and medium-sized hotel operators believes love hotels can provide accommodation for an additional 28 million overnight guests a year, according to the Asahi Shimbun.
“Foreign tourists generally come away from their first stay at a love with a positive impression, and guidebooks all describe them as luxurious, clean and spacious,” said Schreiber. “And you get all of that for much less than a night at the Hilton.”
Fill the grid so that every row, every column and every 3x3 box contains the numbers 1 to 9.
For a helping hand call our solutions line on 0906 200 83 83. Calls cost £1.03 per minute from a BT landline. Calls from other networks may vary and mobiles will be considerably higher. Service supplied by ATS. Call 0330 333 6946 for customer service (charged at standard rate).
Buy the next issue of the Guardian or subscribe to our Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.
Blind date: ‘I wish it had been on a Friday: I’d have liked more cocktails’
Cabinet message discipline went awry on Saturday after Theresa May and Boris Johnson issued Christmas statements to the nation that came close to contradicting each other.
The prime minister and her foreign secretary did not disagree on policy, or party politics or the intricacies of Brexit, but on something more basic: whether 2016 was a good year or a bad one.
May went with an optimistic tone. “This year, the United Kingdom has had much to celebrate,” her message started. She went on to cite the Olympics and the Queen’s 90th birthday as national high points, but not the vote to leave the European Union.
As a Brexit supporter, Johnson might be expected to remember 2016 more fondly. But his opening was quite different and, in a video message posted on Twitter, he began: “We come now to the end of 2016, and I know that lots of people will be looking back at some of the gloomy bits about this year.”
He went on: “We’ve still got a terrible civil war going on in Syria, we are seeing terrorist outrages taking place in our European continent.”
Johnson, who delivered his message in front of a Christmas tree, assured viewers that British diplomats, armed forces and intelligences services were working to keep the country safe.
The foreign secretary later segued to a more positive tone. “In case you’re feeling too downcast this Christmas, don’t forget that overall the people of this planet are living longer, they are living in better health, they’re better educated than ever before, particularly women, and I can tell you that global Britain is leading that effort. So, hope that cheers you up,” he said. “Have a great Christmas and a happy 2017.”
May’s message was sent to journalists at 11am on Friday under embargo, for release at midnight. Johnson’s message was posted at Twitter just after 1pm.
May used the annual prime ministerial Christmas message to say that she did not want Brexit to divide the country. “As we leave the European Union, we must seize an historic opportunity to forge a bold new role for ourselves in the world and to unite our country as we move forward into the future,” she said.
Christmas was a time to “proudly celebrate the birth of Christ and the message of forgiveness, love and hope that he brings”, she added. “We also think of Christians in other parts of the world who face persecution this Christmas and re-affirm our determination to stand up for the freedom of people of all religions to practise their beliefs in peace and safety.”
She ended her message with a tribute to those working over the holiday period. “Having grown up in a vicarage, I know how demanding it can be for those who have to work over the Christmas period,” she said.
Jeremy Corbyn, the Labour leader, focused on homelessness in his Christmas message, saying: “In the sixth richest country in the world, no one should be on the streets in the first place. But Shelter say that 120,000 children will spend this Christmas without a home to call their own.”
He said Labour values were the same as Christmas values. “It’s the goodwill and generosity of ordinary people, public service and charity workers who give tirelessly to help the most vulnerable and the lonely. They remind us of Christmas values: love for your neighbour, working together and hope – hope that things can be different. These are Labour values, my values and our values. They are values that remind us that together we can and will change our country for the better.”
Tim Farron, the Liberal Democrat leader, posted a Christmas video on YouTube, filmed in a centre for refugee children in Paris. He said he was “not at all squeamish about patriotism” and wanted Britain to be a country that did the right thing for people fleeing persecution.
Calling for the UK to be welcoming to refugees, Farron said people should imagine how they would expect other countries to help if Britain were a war-torn country and if Britons were fleeing abroad for their own safety.
In her Christmas message, Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, also mentioned the plight of refugees. “Scotland has a proud reputation as a caring country and I want to thank everyone in the last year who has extended a warm welcome to those seeking refuge and comfort here,” she said.
She urged people to consider those in need of help or company over Christmas. “I would encourage everyone to take the time to check on a friend or neighbour who is on their own. It’s important to spend some time over the next few weeks giving comfort, companionship and support to those who need it,” she said.
Normal sudoku rules apply, except the numbers in the cells contained within dotted lines add up to the figures in the corner. No number can be repeated within each shape formed by dotted lines.
For a helping hand call our solutions line on 0906 200 83 83. Calls will cost £1.03 per minute, plus your phone company’s access charge. Calls from other networks may vary and mobiles will be considerably higher. Service supplied by ATS. Call 0330 333 6946 for customer service (charged at standard rate).
Buy the Guardian or subscribe to our Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.
Letters: If we want to make sure our most vulnerable people are not forgotten, we must bring some longevity to our charity
Three Christmas cheers for the Guardian and Observer’s appeal in aid of refugee children, for combining both the need for charity and change – and showing society that the two are not mutually exclusive.
The seasonal concern for others – from restaurants opening for the homeless to toy and gift donations – is always uplifting. But before Boxing Day morning has even begun, consumers will be splurging cash at the sales and government policy continuing to create the kind of desperate need that a few pounds in the charity tin at Christmas can never solve.
As a GP in Oldham, I will be spending the post-Christmas Day period tending the vulnerable who are made up of more than just the elderly and frail who have been failed by our fragile social care system. They will no doubt also include those experiencing stress-related illnesses, including desperate anxiousness caused by ongoing joblessness and the spectre of debt. While some individuals will have consumed about six times their recommended daily calorie intake on Christmas Day, my patients may also include malnourished children.
Homelessness has become this year’s cause célèbre – and given that three-quarters of them have physical health problems and 80% have mental health issues, they will no doubt be seeking medical attention too. Because of the government’s cuts to homeless shelters, many will be back on the streets in the cold.
Random acts of kindness must be replaced by a concerted sense of compassion 365 days a year. And charitable drives need to be accompanied by awareness-raising exercises that do not shy away from challenging government to examine disastrous policies such as the bedroom tax, which are beginning to bite and could leave thousands more people homeless.
One of the most famous charitable campaigns in Britain’s history is “A Dog is for Life and not just for Christmas” which warned that animals bought as pets are often discarded and maltreated following the festivities. If we want to make sure our most vulnerable people are not forgotten, we must bring some longevity to our charity and ensure it is accompanied by the kind of political action that can lead to sustainable change.
Dr Zahid Chauhan
Medlock Medical Practice, Manchester
• Re the John Mullan article on representation of Christmas in literature (Review, 17 December), my favourite is the Christmas dinner scene in A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man. Among many reasons is that until I first read it, I thought that only in my family was politics so near the surface that it would turn the most sacred occasion into mayhem at the slightest opportunity. And it had nothing to do with drink in our case, a tiny glass of port being all that was likely to be on offer. It was pure passion, and this Joyce conveys as no one else could. The Christmas dinner in The Dead has a similar quality of emotion, where tears and laughter have the same intensity. 
Ann Dowling
Manchester
• I read in last Saturday’s Guide (17 December) the review of what was described as “The festive 40” programmes for the Christmas and New Year season. It was a strange article. None of the list of 40 had any connection to Christmas at all and those programmes that did got no mention whatsoever – programmes such as Midnight Mass on Christmas Eve (BBC1), Christmas carols with Aled Jones (ITV1), Carols from King’s (BBC2), Christmas Day service (BBC1), On Christmas Night (BBC1) and Gospel Christmas (BBC2). It might pay the Guardian to offer some training on what Christmas is all about to the anonymous reviewer? 
Prebendary Neil Richardson
Braintree, Essex
• Stuart Heritage asserts: “Elf on the Shelf isn’t a real Christmas tradition … It began 12 years ago as a self-published picture book in the US” (G2, 19 December). Well we had an “elf on the shelf” (or mantelpiece) back in the 1960s – he’s still brought out at Christmas but he’s now sadly missing his little Noel book.
When we took our young son to my mother’s at Christmas in about 1990, he was told the story about the Christmas elf on the mantelpiece – then later on, when he thought no one was watching, he went up to the fireplace and said to the elf: “I’m not afraid of YOU!”
So it probably is a tradition from somewhere – my grandmother was German – but has been co-opted commercially!
Mike Whittaker
Stapleton, Shropshire
• A two-page article (Rapid polar warming ‘behind a dramatic rise in extreme weather’, 20 December) and a photospread of Christmas lights decorating the outside of houses across the UK (Eyewitness, 20 December). Ah, the irony!
• As a long-term subscriber to the Guardian I received a Christmas card – thank you. If I cancelled my subscription and started anew I would receive a £50 M&S voucher.
Kate Wheller
Wyke Regis, Dorset
• Is nothing sacred any more? King William’s College Quiz on 22 December in the Guardian Kindle edition, when everyone knows it belongs in the Christmas Eve edition of the paper.
Pam Lunn
Kenilworth, Warwickshire
• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters
Enam Ali breaks off a small shard of poppadom in the dining room of his 94-seat, oak-panelled restaurant, Le Raj, in Epsom. The story behind this curry staple, and many others, has a uniquely British twist.
“The poppadom does come from India, but it did not originate for the purpose used in Britain,” says the Bangladeshi-born restaurateur and champion of the UK curry industry. In India, he said, poppadoms were like a bowl of crisps, but in the UK they were used to replace bread rolls and butter to accompany a meal. “Such a great story,” says Ali.
He then turns to other dishes that have made the long journey from India to Britain – and changed along the way. “If you go to India they will not be able to make you an onion bhaji like a big ball, because an English onion is big. In India they’ve got a small shallot.”
This is the type of story that Ali, 56, wants to tell on a television channel he is launching in late March that is dedicated to the curry dining industry in Britain. The sector has been a huge British success and is worth around £4.2bn. British curry is even becoming an important export: Le Raj flew out 25 turkey tikka masalas this Christmas to an artist in Italy.
That success story, however, is under threat from a worker shortage that has been brought into sharper relief by the Brexit vote. The curry sector, which employs 100,000 people in the UK, was overwhelmingly pro-leave, according to Ali. Brexit campaigners suggested that a quid pro quo for restrictions on EU immigration would be more visas for workers from Asia who will have the skills to work in the establishments owned by Ali and thousands of other curry entrepreneurs.
“The majority of curry restaurant owners support Brexit. Look at the Birmingham referendum vote and you can see how much Asians voted for Brexit,” he says, referring to a city that saw 50.4% of the population vote to leave. “We see that Britain has a value of equality with the world, so why is it that European people can just walk in? We are not asking for priority to be given to anybody; we just want to have equal treatment.”
From Ali’s point of view, the EU jobs market is not producing the right staff for his industry. He is trying to set up a catering academy in partnership with a local college that will include training kitchens and an on-site restaurant, but says he cannot find the calibre of applicants from within the EU. “I’ve been advertising since July,” he says. “But I’m not finding anybody to train. It could start tomorrow, but we need four people to train.”
The reliance on overseas workers is characteristic of the broader hospitality industry. Recent figures from the global software group Fourth found that 57% of all restaurant workers came from outside the UK, while the British Beer & Pub Association has called for an immigration system that will prop up staffing numbers at a time when there is a shortage of pub chefs. But the curry problem is more acute, because of the level of sophistication of modern Indian cuisine. It needs expert skills that are rarely found outside sub-continental Asia.
“Every day I’m hearing of a [curry] restaurant closing, because someone has said: ‘I’ve had enough. I’ll let it go,’” sighs Ali. As he speaks, a young Romanian waiter brings over a lamb shank dish, made from 22 spices that are freshly ground in the kitchen, at once demonstrating the difficulty in getting Asians into the industry and the level of sophistication that modern curry cuisine requires.
Meanwhile, tough immigration restrictions remain in place and they make it extremely difficult for curry restaurateurs to bring over the chefs they need. A chef from outside the EU must be paid £29,570 a year in order to qualify for a visa from the UK government, which becomes cripplingly expensive for restaurateurs once accommodation and meal costs are added. Worse still, sponsor licences cannot be granted to restaurants that have a takeaway service – a business model which is vital even to high-end curry houses like Le Raj.
Ali insists his proposal for a one- or two-year visa for chefs from sub-continental Asia, who would then return home having taken no welfare benefits from the UK, is gaining traction in government. This plan would add around 5,000 to net migration figures. Just before the referendum, Ali sat down with David Cameron in Downing Street to discuss his proposal and claims the then PM said “it was not right” that the takeaway rule was blocking appointments from overseas.
In his fight to keep the curry industry in a thriving state, Ali is also turning to the media. He is launching a 24-hour TV channel devoted to the sector, called ION, which will be based in a studio in east London.
“The channel will help the audience to understand the great British curry,” says Ali. “Our main target is industry news. It’s a new kind of channel to engage a new generation of hospitality.”
He also founded the British curry awards, often referred to as the Oscars of the industry. Presenters this year included a sari-wearing Duchess of York, the James Bond actor Colin Salmon, transport secretary Chris Grayling, and DJ Pat Sharp, unrecognisable shorn of his 1980s mullet.
Those awards, Ali’s Spice Business trade magazine, and this new channel are, he believes, vital to encourage the next generations of British-Indians, Pakistanis and Bangladeshis to keep the industry alive. Ali’s son, Jeffrey, gave up a promising career with Apple to work in Le Raj, but other Asian families find their children are shunning a life in hospitality. This is a contributing factor to the curry crisis, which has seen hundreds of restaurants and takeaways close in the past two years, with fears that a further 4,000 establishments – more than a third of the industry – could soon follow.
After lobbying Cameron, Ali has a new incumbent to impress at No 10. He spoke to Theresa May when she was home secretary, and thinks Brexit and the need for new trade deals around the world will mark the “start” of the government getting to grips with the issue. Yet in a video message to the British curry awards last month, May did not mention the crisis.
Instead, she said: “Today curry is as close to the nation’s hearts as fish and chips. Right now there must be thousands of British families sitting down to a spicy meal at home and in local restaurants … This represents a great British success story which creates jobs, promotes growth, and contributes to the UK’s economy.”
Ali is hoping to get May as a first guest on his new channel. If she agrees, May will surely be asked to explain when she is going to lift those immigration restrictions to keep those restaurants, and that great British success story, going.
We must keep our views in proportion. The terrorist attack in Berlin (Nine dead in Berlin truck horror, 20 December) was awful, but why are we more upset about it than when a boat full of refugees sinks in the Mediterranean? I wonder how many lives have been saved by Germany’s open door to refugees? How many lost because of our closed door?
Martin Cooper
Bromley, Kent
• After attracting several verbal greetings with additional hand signals as I chug through east Cheshire, I am very relieved to read in your letters (21 December) that the local youth were probably calling me a “lozzucker”.
Ian Grieve
“Gordon Bennett”, Shropshire Union canal
• Hanging around on the pit top to go underground, you would often get from the shift coming out of the pit “Atha laykin lads”. You can still hear it today in some parts of South Yorkshire.
Mike Eggenton
Firbeck, South Yorkshire
• I am an 86-year-old widow. I voted remain. One son voted remain, the other for Brexit. We brought them up to think for themselves, hence no conflict at Christmas (Letters, 23 December).
Brenda Lee
Leicester
• Every day you bring me wit, intelligence and thoughtfulness, without which my life would be very much the poorer. I know I might seem uncaring, never having told you before, but I just want you to know that I do love you. Will you marry me? Your devoted friend,
Peter Hanson
Exeter
• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters
Inexpensive, thirst-quenching and very old-fashioned: keep a jug in the fridge as a pick-me-up for when you can’t face yet another boozy Christmas drink. Keep the cooked barley and use as pearly ballast in savoury wintry salads. And use lemon instead of orange, if you prefer. Serves four.
2 oranges, washed, zested and juiced 
65g pearl barley
1.5 litres cold water
1cm piece ginger, peeled and sliced
2-3 tbsp caster sugar, to taste
Put the zest in a pan with the barley, water and ginger. Bring to a boil, skim, then turn to a simmer and cook until the barley is tender: 15-20 minutes. Strain into a jug, add the sugar and stir to dissolve. Add the juice, chill and serve in tall glasses over ice.
• Claire Thomson is the author of The Five O’Clock Apron (Ebury, £20).
The Christmas holidays are a perfect opportunity to catch up with friends in the best possible way: over a table of good food. Choose dishes that deliver on flavour, look great and are also deceptively simple: today’s stew, for instance, almost cooks itself. The doughnuts, meanwhile, need a little time to prove, but the kneading is easy and the boozy cream a deliciously decadent alternative to jam. So end the year as you mean to go on, and remind yourself of the power of great food and good company.
The sweet onion puree is a lovely backdrop to the deep flavours in the stew. Serves six to eight.
1.5kg beef shin (or other stewing beef), cut into 4cm chunks
2 tbsp plain flour, seasoned (optional)
Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper
4 tbsp olive oil
2 medium onions, peeled and finely chopped
1 carrot, cut into roughly 1cm dice
2 sticks celery, cut into roughly 1cm dice
350ml stout
350ml beef (or chicken) stock
3 star anise
3 branches rosemary
60ml red-wine vinegar
½ jar pickled walnuts, cut into slices
For the onion puree
150g butter
8 onions, peeled, halved and finely sliced
¼ nutmeg, freshly grated 
½ tsp brown sugar
1 small bunch thyme, leaves picked
Heat the oven to 130C/260F/gas mark ½. Toss the beef in the flour, if using; otherwise, season generously.
Heat half the oil in a large casserole on a medium flame, then fry the vegetables until soft, about eight to 10 minutes, seasoning well as they cook, then remove from the pan.
Turn up the heat and, when the pan is smoking hot, add the remaining oil and brown the beef in batches until caramelised all over (if you overcrowd the pan, the meat will sweat rather than fry, so it won’t brown and you’ll miss out on flavour in the finished dish). Once all the meat is browned, return the beef and vegetables to the casserole and add the stout, stock, star anise and rosemary. Bring to simmering point, then cover and cook in the oven for three hours. Add the vinegar and walnuts, season again to taste, and cook for another hour or so, until the beef is tender and falling apart.
Meanwhile, melt the butter in a wide pan, then add the onions, nutmeg, sugar and thyme. Season well, cook on a medium heat for half an hour, stirring from time to time, until softened but not golden, then blitz smooth with a stick blender.
Serve the beef over some of the warm puree, perhaps with braised red cabbage and mash alongside.
The cream in these homemade doughnuts is irresistible. Makes 50 mini doughnuts – allow two to three per person, and freeze whatever dough you don’t need.
7g dried fast-action yeast sachet
50g caster sugar, plus extra for dusting
175ml lukewarm milk
500g strong bread flour, plus extra for dusting
1 tsp fine sea salt
100g unsalted butter, cubed
2 large eggs, beaten
2 litres sunflower oil for deep frying, plus extra for greasing
For the cream
75ml armagnac (or brandy)
30g caster sugar
225g pitted prunes
Earl Grey tea (3 bags or 1½ tbsp loose-leaf), steeped in 375ml boiling water
200ml double cream
150g 70% dark chocolate
Mix the yeast in a small bowl with a teaspoon of sugar, then pour on the milk and leave to froth for five minutes. Whisk together the flour, salt and remaining sugar, then rub in the butter with your fingertips.
Make a well in the flour mix, and beat in the eggs and the yeast mixture. Turn out the dough on to a lightly floured surface and knead for 10 minutes, until it feels smooth and springy (or give it five minutes in a mixer with a dough hook). Shape into a ball, put in a lightly greased bowl and cover loosely with clingfilm. Leave in a warm place to rise for an hour, until doubled in size.
Meanwhile, heat the armagnac and sugar in a pan, stirring to dissolve the sugar, then turn off the heat, add the prunes and strained tea, and set aside to infuse for 30 minutes. Blitz smooth with a hand blender. Beat the cream to floppy, soft peaks, and gently fold into the prune mix.
Turn out the dough on to a work surface and knead for a minute. At this stage, freeze whatever dough you don’t need straight away and save it for next time. Divide the remaining dough into 30g pieces and shape each one into a ball. Lay these out on greased, lined baking sheets, making sure there is plenty of space between the balls to allow for rising, and leave to prove for 45 minutes.
Melt the chocolate in a bain-marie or microwave; keep warm on a very low flame. Heat the oil in a large pan to 170C. Frying three to five balls at a time, carefully drop them into the hot oil and fry for three minutes a side. Lift out with a slotted spoon and drain on kitchen towel, then repeat with the remaining dough.
Once all the doughnuts are fried, tip them into a bowl and dust with caster sugar. Arrange on a plate, drizzle over the chocolate sauce and serve with a bowl of the cream, for dunking (or use a piping bag to inject each doughnut with cream).
The beef improves after cooking, so make it ahead of time, if you can. It makes yummy leftovers, too, particularly on soft polenta or pasta ribbons with plenty of grated parmesan. Pickled walnuts are a fine accompaniment to cold cuts, particularly ham, and cheese plates. Excess prune puree is gorgeous spooned over morning yoghurt or stirred into porridge.
The most comprehensive analysis ever carried out of comedy panel shows has found that only once in the history of British TV and radio has a programme had an all-female lineup.
Of more than 4,700 individual episodes examined by data scientist Stuart Lowe, 1,488 programmes since 1967 have been made up solely of men. But only on one occasion in 49 years has there been a programme in which the presenter and all the panel were women – an episode of BBC Radio 4’s Heresy in January 2012 presented by Victoria Coren Mitchell.
Lowe, who trained as an astronomer, works at the Open Data Institute in Leeds. He compiled his research in his spare time over more than four years, after his irritated observations about the scarcity of women on comedy panel shows developed, he cheerfully admits, into an obsession.
He compiled his mind-bogglingly detailed research – which lists all the participants of every episode of every programme he could find over five decades – by trawling through the BBC iPlayer archives and those of other broadcasters, adding figures shared by other individuals who had done their own research into specific shows, and by trawling through back issues of the Radio Times dating from 1967, when Just a Minute first broadcast on BBC Radio 4.
While women still account for just 31% of appearances on comedy panel shows, the analysis shows there has been a steady and sustained improvement since 1989, when that figure was a shocking 3%. Statistically, however, the best year for equality remains 1967, thanks to the fact that for its first series, Just a Minute never fielded fewer than two women out of a total of five participants, including the presenter Nicholas Parsons.
The trend towards equality long predates the BBC’s announcement in 2014 that panel programmes without women were “not acceptable”. The broadcaster has been as good as its word, Lowe found. Since then, no nationally broadcast BBC comedy panel show has been screened without a female participant, though in some cases, such as Mock the Week, that number has been stubbornly stuck at one and no more for regular episodes.
“It’s a little bit of an obsession,” Lowe said, “and I’ve made a rod for my own back in that I have to keep it updated, which slightly drives me insane when I realise some weeks I’ve missed some panel shows and I have to go back and add them.”
So what keeps him going – a crusading feminism or a data obsession? “I don’t think they have to be at opposite ends of the spectrum. You can care about equality and about data at the same time. I think it’s a problem that half the population isn’t fully represented.”
Lowe has built his database to accommodate the potential scenario in which a performer does not identify as male or female, but as another gender.
Until last week, he had used an “other” category only once – for the tub of lard that appeared in place of Roy Hattersley on Have I Got News For You in 1993. The late withdrawal of Nicky Morgan from the programme last Friday, when she was replaced by an expensive handbag, brought that total to two.
Lowe also analysed the ages of participants by trawling through Wikipedia, and said he would like to measure educational background and ethnicity, “but that would be harder to do because I would have to categorise people based on appearance, and I would be reluctant to do that”.
The programme with the highest female participation, at over 60%, is Listomania on BBC Radio 2, though Lowe’s personal scoring index gives highest marks for a consistently equal spread of women and men to BBC2’s Insert Name Here, hosted by Sue Perkins.
Coren Mitchell told the Guardian she had initially hoped her all-female episode of Heresy – in which her guests were Maureen Lipman, Perkins and Cerys Matthews – would pass unremarked “as though it were completely normal. Of course that was screwed up by the continuity announcer on the night who went: ‘And here’s something unusual – an all-female lineup!’ So that scuppered that.
“The thing that surprised me is that it turned out to be the silliest episode of the series,” Coren said – neither less funny, as sexists might expect, or with some deeper feminist meaning. “It was just daft, very funny and very trivial.”
She added: “My theory is that, because productions usually put one woman on a panel show (or none) and stop there, women get used to having to (at some wearisome level) ‘represent’ female humour when we appear on these shows ... but with four women the pressure was off. It was nobody’s individual responsibility to prove anything. So we all got the chance to just mess about, relax and make free jokes like men do.”
Of 11 episodes that have had 75% or more female involvement since 1967, Lowe found, Coren Mitchell appeared in four.
Deborah Frances-White, a standup comedian whose own panel show, Global Pillage, is among a number of podcasts analysed by Lowe, agrees about the pressure female comedians experience when they find themselves the only woman on a panel.
“A lot of the time what people don’t realise they are watching is five men in their local pub – they are regulars, they look like everyone else and they are made to feel welcome – and one woman on a job interview. Because she knows that not only will [the audience] decide whether she is good enough to be allowed back on this show and other panel shows, but they will be judging whether all women are funny.”
Though it doesn’t solve the problem, increasing the number of women as hosts or regulars makes a significant difference, notes Lowe – he credits QI (BBC), 8 Out of 10 Cats (Channel 4) and E4’s Virtually Famous for all having recently appointed female team captains or presenters.
ITV’s Celebrity Juice and Play to the Whistle both have female hosts or team captains, and Saskia Schuster, the commissioning editor of comedy entertainment at ITV, said the broadcaster was always “conscious of the mix of voices we are bringing to the show, whether that’s gender, race, class, age”. However, she acknowledged that TV had “some way to go” to reflect the increasing numbers of women entering the traditionally male-dominated comedy scene.
“As an industry, we definitely need to achieve a better balance of gender on our shows and this is what we are pushing for from our producers and guest bookers, so that the discussion moves on from gender representation and eventually ceases to be a discussion at all,” she said.
A Channel 4 insider said it was committed to more women working both on- and offscreen on its major panel shows, saying the production teams on some of its highest-profile programmes “skewed heavily female”.
A BBC spokeswoman said the broadcaster was “keen to make sure our programmes reflect our audiences”, which was why it had led the way on committing in 2014 to having women onscreen on every show. “We are proud of the roster of funny women we have across television and radio. Whilst these figures show there is still more for all broadcasters to do, it is encouraging to see a trend towards better representation of women in recent years,” she said.
While some see more women making a career in standup, Lowe acknowledges there are still fewer women on the comedy circuit. His best estimate last year, based on an analysis of Chortle’s database of working comedians, was that about 18% of standups are women. “People are right to say that the comedy circuit is a problem – and that isn’t the broadcasters’ fault,” said Lowe.
But even taking that percentage into account, he said, one would statistically expect those programmes that appear stuck on a maximum of one female guest to have a number of episodes where there were two or three women, “and that just isn’t happening”. For any bookers still struggling to find funny women, Lowe has compiled a list of 168 of them – he welcomes further submissions.
Some have argued that the heyday of traditional panel shows is fading, while female comics are thriving in other formats on TV and radio, from Phoebe Waller-Bridge’s Fleabag to Catastrophe, co-starring and co-written by Sharon Horgan. A spokeswoman for Radio 4 said it was proud to include “lots of talented female comedians” on panels, but added: “Panel shows are only part of our offering, and next year we have brand new shows from the likes of Sara Pascoe, Sarah Kendall and double act Lazy Susan.”
Danielle Ward created BBC Radio 4 Extra’s Dilemma and Do the Right Thing, which she presents on Comedy.co.uk; the latter recently filmed a pilot for Channel 4, with Claudia Winkleman hosting. “If I achieve nothing else in my career, my panel show pilot had five women on it,” she tweeted after filming. “Fuck yeah.”
With both shows, Ward said, she and her producer have very deliberately booked diverse panels, and she never has more than two straight white men: “It’s not about being a corrective. I’m just not interested in hearing four straight, white comedians talking about themselves. The conversation is never going to be as interesting.”
For the same reason, Ward said she would not book four straight women. “It’s not about correcting it in terms of numbers, it’s about offering a sense of conversation that’s beyond just one narrow pool of people.”
The new year got off to an impressive start with a headline that managed to blame childless women for the struggling economy, NHS meltdown and shorter life expectancies. Plague of locusts soon expected to follow.
US talk show host Wendy Williams criticised singer Kesha for speaking out about alleged sexual abuse: “If everybody complained because somebody allegedly sexually abused them ... contracts would be broken all the time.”
In a month of inane cleavage obsession, everybody, from talented actresses to politicians, became obsessed with puns about their breasts. It made for an exciting new journalistic angle that delighted readers everywhere, and certainly didn’t make women want to stab their own eyes out.
The new junior doctors’ contract openly discriminated against women. Luckily, we were repeatedly reassured that “any indirect adverse effect on women is a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim”, which made women doctors feel much better. Meanwhile, April also saw legendary abolitionist Harriet Tubman become the first woman in the world to be told, “give us a smile, love”, 100 years after her death, when her appearance on the new $20 bill wasn’t cheerful enough to satisfy some men. 
Muirfield golf course proudly confirmed its utter lack of connection with the 21st century with a vote to keep female members out, only to later suffer cruel revenge when the female population of Edinburgh excluded its members from sitting on a particularly fetching park bench. Touché. 
The murder of Labour MP Jo Cox by rightwing terrorist Thomas Mair threw a spotlight on the ongoing abuse faced by large numbers of female MPs – and suggested that perhaps it might be dangerous to normalise violent threats as a way to silence an uppity woman in a position of power. 
Leslie Jones received racist and misogynistic Twitter abuse for the cardinal sin of taking part in an all-female movie remake. Meanwhile, Nottinghamshire police’s decision to record misogyny as a hate crime was met with widespread panic, but fears of innocent men being locked up for compliments were proved misplaced when women instead reported abuse and assault.
Olympic commentators desperately competed for the honour of providing the “most sexist coverage”, and men worldwide were gifted some insightful advice about how to talk to women in the street, even when they are wearing headphones and might not want to talk to you. Meanwhile, France’s burkini ban proved that trying to score political points through the misogynistic policing of women’s bodies and choices never goes out of style.
A woman Nasa astronaut was “corrected” on Twitter by a man who had once been to space camp. He provided inspiration for another 2016 hero who later in the year challenged renowned Cambridge professor Mary Beard, mansplaining the fall of Rome, based on what he had seen in Gladiator. 
Tapes were released in which Donald Trump boasted about grabbing women “by the pussy”. When women objected, #RepealThe19th began trending on Twitter, as Trump supporters effectively reassured them that there really wasn’t any misogyny to worry about after all. Meanwhile, footballer Ched Evans was acquitted of rape following the admission of evidence in court about his accuser’s sexual history. This news was met by online vitriol matched only by that spewed in her direction after he had been found guilty in his first trial. 
Every woman in the world gave a sigh of recognition as Hillary Clinton was beaten by a man infinitely less qualified than her to do the same job. Meanwhile, Moroccan state TV made important strides towards eliminating domestic violence by showing a helpful programme showing women how to use make up to cover it up. 
Article 50 claimant Gina Miller received a torrent of racist and sexist abuse online after making a legal challenge to Brexit, noted anti-feminist MP Philip Davies was elected to the commons’ Women and Equalities committee, and Fifa announced it had solved the problem of getting girls into football with nice-smelling bibs. And finally, a Silicon Valley entrepreneur who pleaded guilty to battery charges after police said he punched and kicked his girlfriend 117 times in 2013 (although he disputes the extent of his assault) was given a great new job at a venture capital firm, while still awaiting sentencing. Because if 2016 has taught us anything, it’s that allegations of sexual assault don’t ruin a man’s career.
I am the eldest of four children of a single mother. I have two sisters and a brother, who is the second child. He is now 40, but does not have a career, friends or money. He still lives at home with our mother and does not contribute to bills.
Our mother worked hard for us and we never went without. There were money problems, but the rest of us were resilient enough to deal with them. We three girls have careers, partners and children and have been living independently for years.
My brother, however, plays the victim card. For example, he blames my mum for pushing him into the wrong degree – not true. He has done odd jobs over the years. He worked in one place for a long time but refused to go for higher-paying management positions. He feels he is too intelligent for such roles.
This has gone on for the past 20 years. He is perpetually angry, abusive and belligerent with us. When he is around non-family members, he is charming but with us he is rude and aggressive. He shouts at and abuses my mum, and my biggest fear is that he will hit her one day.
As a family we have offered to pay for counselling (he refused), we have given him money and bought him things. But he doesn’t appreciate it. He seems to think he has suffered some kind of injustice in life. He doesn’t take any responsibility for his life and even now will say that his predicament is everyone else’s fault. He refers to things that happened 20 years ago, and makes things up from the past to justify his victim status. He will say that we ruined his life and it’s because he did what we “wanted”.
He has been given opportunities to live away from home, but refuses. He lives with my mum while resenting and blaming her.
I have told my mum to kick him out, but she is reluctant. I don’t know how to make her be stronger. He acts like a baby, so she treats him like one. She was not this soft on the rest of us, especially me. I no longer speak to my brother.
I have said my mum should say that he should have therapy or move out. If he ends up on the streets, so be it. We have tried for years. I am sick of it. My mum is in her 70s. She no longer has the strength for the arguments.
I wasn’t sure how seriously worried you were about your mother being hit, as it wasn’t the focus of your much longer letter. If your mother is ever in danger she must dial 999 – assault is a criminal offence. I have also put a link at the bottom of the column, which you may find useful regarding the other aspects of abuse you mention.
I wonder if, growing up, you had to adopt a mothering role with your brother? You seem to have more of a parental relationship with him, rather than a sibling one. How do your sisters feel? Where is/was your dad? When did he leave the picture and why? Sometimes it’s what you can’t see, what isn’t mentioned, that is incredibly relevant.
I contacted psychotherapist Leila Bargawi (childpsychotherapy.org.uk), who notes that you seem quite “critical that he wasn’t more resilient”. There does seem to be a lot of disdain for him – the only boy. Bargawi also wonders if there was a narrative in your family about the men being losers. Maybe they were, but if it were presented as a gender, rather than person-specific thing (men are hopeless; women are resourceful and resilient), that may have had a big impact on all of you, but especially on your brother growing up without, it seems, a positive male role model.
Bargawi also wonders if somewhere along the line, unconsciously, your mother and brother were company for one another and if in some way “your brother has actually protected you all. He was the one who stayed at home while you were all able to go and do your own thing.” Maybe your brother felt overly responsible towards your mother, hence him saying that he did what you all wanted him to. Maybe this responsibility has now turned to resentment.
There is something “quite adolescent in your brother’s behaviour”, notes Bargawi, who says, “his emotional development may not have gone to plan”. And we both wondered if, in some way – subconsciously – your mother was getting something out of him being at home (and vice versa, despite his anger). This will seem incredible, but nowhere in your letter did I get a sense of how your mother felt about all this – only about how you feel. Your mother, by your own admission, is reluctant to chuck him out.
What can you do? Well, you cannot make your mum chuck him out, any more than one of your children in the future could make you throw out one of their siblings. Bargawi suggests that perhaps you can “find it in you to be supportive. Maybe remember a time in childhood when you got on. If he is always going on about his childhood, maybe there is something about that time that he needs to unpack.”
I think you need to ask yourself some questions: “Why am I so angry with my brother? What do I want to achieve and is it achievable, and what would happen if I did nothing?”
Contact Annalisa Barbieri, The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU, or email annalisa.barbieri@mac.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into personal correspondence.
We’re pootling along winter-sun-dappled roads overhung with ancient trees, their limbs drooping leaves of ochre and butterscotch and vermilion. It could be another century, one where I’ll be tucking headscarf under chin for a postprandial along Honey Lane to admire the unchanging countryside.
Our destination could also be from another century: a former pub in the village of Burchetts Green, notable for its bunting-clad infant school, agricultural college and… well, that’s about it. The Crown is family-run – but what a family. Exuberantly barnetted paterfamilias Simon Bonwick is alone in the kitchen, while several of his nine children – yes, nine, and all as perfectly presented and smilingly scrubbed as Von Trapps – work the room. The eldest (Dean, I think) laughs, “No, we’re never short of staff.”
There’s a classic, French-accented prix fixe at lunch (three courses for £25: cromesquis and crépinettes and cassoulets), but we order à la carte, to put Bonwick through his paces, and also because prices are (for this part of the world) eminently reasonable. Recent Michelin stardom has seen these creep up a little (understandable), but it’s still possible to do the full blowout for two with wine for around a ton.
That this is Bonwick’s empire and sole vision is evident from everything that issues from his kitchen; his mission, says the website, is “cooking and serving the kind of food I like to eat”. Generosity is a keynote: a crab starter delivers an unholy amount of chunky white meat bound with the lightest mayonnaise; on top, petals of skinned, full-flavoured tomato and julienned apple; and, drizzled about, a sharp, fruity dressing dotted with toasted cashews, a genius move that highlights the crab’s innate sweetness. Far more butch is a slab of fatty rillettes of sanglier (wild boar), a powerful, funky thwop of porcine meatiness sharpened by crisp beer pickles and tiny pearl onions.
Plates are clean and unmessed with, untroubled by today’s trends for the splatter, crumb and blob. Food looks like what it is: it’s all deliciously old-fashioned. Duck breast of perfect rosiness and crispness of skin has “a rather nice duck sauce”: demi-glace, booze, pan juices, I’m guessing, all glossy and rich. Alongside, a duck forcemeat ball topped with witchy tendrils of trompettes, a flourish of just-wilted buttery spinach, fondant potato in the shape of a little muffin, a prune and a roast beetroot: each element is distinct, but all pull harmoniously in the same direction.
Romney salt marsh lamb, chestnut and garlic is every bit as dedicated to delivering the essence of each ingredient: straightforwardly good food. Menu descriptions are smile-inducing: “Treacle Sponge ‘Hot’ Like When You Are Little”. I’d have liked the sponge a little denser and gooier, but with homemade vanilla ice-cream, it’s still comfort in a bowl.
The Crown is simple, unstuffy, as far from its tortured Michelin stablemates as it’s possible to be, a happy marriage of gastropub and restaurant. Bonwick is clearly an adherent of classic French technique: the full Larousse of turned veg, and stocks and demi-glaces reduced into such lip-smacking richness, you just know they’ll stiffen into intense jellies as soon as your back is turned; plus elaborate desserts – “Black Forest ‘cadeau’”, say, is chocolate and cherries wrapped in white chocolate, like a perfect little gift.
The Crown inhabits a fantasy world, a world of Wodehouse combined with a soupçon of Pie In The Sky; the peachy, cooking-pots-and-gewgaws decor could easily have landed from the 70s. As we leave, Bonwick leans out of the kitchen window to wave a cheery goodbye.
This is the kind of small idyll that the horrible white men taking over our world are promising their froggy choruses, uncaring that they’ll never be able to deliver. Now there’s a wry irony: the atmosphere of fear and anxiety they’ve created is making even the likes of me long for this kind of backward-thinking solace, too.
In Burchetts Green, the duck will always have a crisp skin, glossy sauces will always trickle from little copper saucepans, the treacle pudding will always flood the mouth with soothing, sticky sweetness. Fires will continue to crackle in the bar where the ghost of “a small bearded man with a pony” is occasionally glimpsed, and The Girl From Ipanema will warble in the background. In this tiny corner, at least, all will be right with the world.
• The Crown Burchetts Green, Maidenhead, Berkshire, 01628 824079. Open Weds-Sun, 12.30-2pm, 6.30-10pm (closed Sunday dinner). About £30 a head, plus drinks and service.
At my church, Holy Child Jesus in Richmond Hill, New York, Mondays are usually a day of routine: the collection is counted, messages are answered and the building is swept and mopped and put back in order. There are rarely any surprises.
That’s how it was all morning on 23 November last year. The only irregularity was the assembling of the nativity scene the church displays every year. Recently ordained, I’d only been assigned to Holy Child Jesus in February, and was surprised to see our custodian Jose putting it together as I arrived. I remember thinking it was too early (we hadn’t even had Thanksgiving) and made a mental note to talk to Jose about it after lunch.
My own morning schedule included a meeting with two parishioners who were preparing for their wedding. Partway through, my phone started ringing. I apologised to the couple and ignored it, but my secretary came to the door and said, “Father, can I interrupt – there’s an emergency in the church.” I excused myself, saying I would be back as soon as I could.
As we walked over to the church, my secretary explained: “Jose says he’s found un niño.” In Spanish, niño means boy, so I imagined a child who had wandered out of school or perhaps run away from home. I know most of the young kids in the neighbourhood and had already started imagining whom it might be. I was in for a big surprise.
Jose was standing near Mary’s altar, where I’d left him earlier that day assembling the nativity. I could see no sign of a child, but as we approached he said: “I went out to lunch, and when I came back I found him.” I followed his gaze to the nativity scene, and that’s when I saw him huddled inside and wrapped in a towel – the youngest baby I’ve ever seen.
The towel was wet, probably from the birth, and after carefully unwrapping the baby we discovered the umbilical cord still attached. He was dark-haired and healthy looking – there was a little dried blood in the creases around his neck and on his body, as you would expect with a newborn; but he seemed unharmed and wasn’t even crying, just cooing and gurgling, apparently content.
We called 911 and alerted a local school nurse, who told us the baby probably wasn’t more than a few hours old. While we waited for the ambulance, I ran back to my room to fetch clean, dry towels, calling into my office where the couple were still waiting. I told them we’d have to reschedule.
The baby was taken to a nearby hospital. We weren’t allowed to visit, but soon heard that doctors were happy with his condition. Meanwhile, the news spread fast. Even as police tried to track down the child’s mother, my parishioners started discussing potential names. Emmanuel and Jose were mentioned; Jesus, inevitably, was popular.
His mother was found within a day or so. I gather she’s a young woman, just 18, who had come from Mexico and was living with an aunt. She had hidden her pregnancy under baggy clothes and given birth alone in her aunt’s apartment.
Footage from surveillance cameras showed her stopping off with the baby at a convenience store and buying the towel. The police estimated he couldn’t have been alone for more than 15 minutes before Jose found him. Apparently, the mother had tried two other churches before walking into ours, the first that was unlocked.
She wasn’t prosecuted; New York State’s safe-haven law allows desperate parents to leave newborns in a safe location. Confidentiality rules mean we haven’t been told if the baby has been adopted or returned to his mother, but I like to imagine he’s still part of our community. I just feel blessed that he was left with us. I’ve always considered our church a place of love and compassion, and I’m proud we provided a frightened young woman with a place of refuge.
Do you have an experience to share? Email experience@theguardian.com
Bigger bubbles could make your champagne taste better this Christmas, research has found.
It was long thought that a steady stream of tiny bubbles in a glass of champagne was a sign of quality. But researchers in France’s Champagne-Ardenne region have found that larger bubbles may actually improve the way a sparkling wine tastes.
Bigger bubbles – about 3.4mm across at the surface – dramatically enhance the release of aerosols into the air above the glass, the experts found. It means important aromatic compounds that give champagne its distinctive smell and flavour are flung into drinkers’ noses when they take a sip.
Prof Gérard Liger-Belair, a physicist at the University of Reims, who led the research, said: “This result is remarkable as it undermines the popular belief that the smaller the bubbles, the better the champagne. Small bubbles were the worst in terms of aroma release.”
About 1m bubbles form in the average glass of champagne, according to Liger-Belair. They are a result of dissolved carbon dioxide, which forms in the wine due to a second fermentation process that occurs during production inside the sealed bottles.
Using high-speed photography and imaging techniques, Liger-Belair and his colleagues have been able to study precisely what happens to a champagne bubble.
In a study published in the European Physical Journal Special Topics, they show that the bubbles form a regular hexagonal pattern on the surface. When one collapses, it creates a cavity that stretches the neighbouring bubbles, producing a pattern that looks similar to the petals of a flower, creating an avalanche of tiny droplets that are thrown into the air at the top of the glass.
Wine experts often use bubble size as a marker of quality, with larger bubbles found in cheap sparkling wines such as prosecco and cava.
Liger-Belair said bubble size in champagne and sparkling could vary from between 0.4mm and 4mm across. The viscosity of the drink and the glass it is poured into could all influence how big the bubbles were. But bubbles with a radius of 1.7mm across resulted in the highest number of droplets evaporating at the surface of the drink.
He said the research could help lead to innovations that could improve the taste of sparkling wines. “We showed that decreasing champagne viscosity would improve drop evaporation,” said Liger-Belair. “Additives that would change wine viscosity without changing the taste might be used. These results pave the way towards fine tuning of champagne aroma diffusion.”
It is the latest in a long line of research by Liger-Belair and his colleagues. They have shown that chilling champagne can help to reduce the amount of alcohol carried in each bubble, which can prevent more delicate flavours from being overpowered.
Cooling a bottle of champagne to 4C (39F) can help reduce the speed of the cork as it leaves the bottle, preventing accidents, the team found. Tilting the glass when pouring can also help prevent it from overflowing.
Drinking from a flute rather than a wider glass can help to enhance the flavour because of how bubbles mix in a glass. Liger-Belair said: “Bubbles in a glass of champagne may seem like the acme of frivolity to most people, but in fact they may be considered a fantastic playground for any fluid physicist.”
With deft accuracy, a design worker is sticking sparkles on a gift bag in an office festooned with crackers, wrapping paper swatches and shelves loaded with multicoloured glitter.
Based near a former colliery in south Wales, a team of 45 designers work on new creations for IG Design Group – the world’s biggest producer of wrapping paper and crackers. The team started designing for next Christmas in August. One worker says she often gets home to find glitter in her car, on her hair, even on the dog: “It can be Christmas every day here.” 
Loss-making and struggling under a mountain of debt in 2008 after a string of acquisitions, IG has survived by restructuring, and broadening its product ranges to include stickers, gift bags and other new products alongside traditional wrap and cards. The wrapping paper is made in Wales while the design team’s other creations are turned out at IG’s factories in China and the Netherlands.
Paul Fineman, chief executive of the group, says order books for next year are “heaving” because the drop in the value of the pound post-Brexit has boosted demand from abroad.
The group produces 1bn m of wrapping paper a year, almost half of which is made in Wales. It supplies all the major supermarkets and major international retailers including Ikea and Costco. Upmarket crackers, under the Tom Smith brand, sell for up to £500 and will be adorning the royal Christmas dinner table.
In October, IG sent a selection of four specially selected cracker designs to Buckingham Palace so that the Queen could choose one to grace her Christmas table.
Its products may be swathed in glitter, but the factory in Ystrad Mynach, a short drive from Newport, is an example of gritty British survival against the odds.
Previously IG had three sites – one where wrap was printed, one where it spun huge printed reels of paper onto cardboard tubes and another where goods were packed up ready for stores. The group spent £8m on bringing the whole operation together in one site two years ago. It switched to using more environmentally friendly and efficient water-based inks and introduced new processes that can add glitzy touches such as holograms and shiny finishes.
“In 2008 we had to seriously think whether we could make this a viable facility,” says Fineman. “It was loss-making and had a lot of issues. We had choices and one of those choices would have been that this place didn’t have a future as a manufacturing site. But we felt if we could remodel, find different customers and channels and create a sufficient resource to invest that not only could we survive but it would be very profitable. It was very challenging but it is working.”
IG’s enormous printing machines have 10 heads that layer ink onto a polymer roll on which the design has been laser cut so it stands proud like a giant potato print. Paper from reels more than 1m thick is fed through the printing system before being dried in a long oven and then sliced in half as it is spun back into another thick roll.
The plant can print 72km of paper an hour, and employs up to 450 people at peak times about half of whom work in manufacturing.
From September the printing machines are working 24/7 right up until Christmas week to cope with late orders from British retailers. Production restarts for next Christmas almost immediately and shipping begins from June or July with boxes of wrapping paper packed off to Bristol docks and shipped over the Atlantic.
The company is having a good year. Underlying sales were up more than a fifth in the six months to the end of September with profits up 36% as gift bag sales soared.
Fineman says the fall in sterling will bring another boost. “The UK is going to be a very uncertain place. But over the next 12 to 18 months UK manufacturing, the number of cards sold is up 5% year on year.
“Sending Christmas cards has declined other than single cards to close relatives. “People aren’t just writing out cards to their colleagues at work. But there are new occasions and reasons to send cards all the time. People just see a card and think ‘that’s fun’ and get it. There doesn’t have to be a specific reason any longer.”
IG is also trying the same trick with crackers – with versions for Halloween and Easter. Some of the crackers are designed in Wales but they are made at the company’s factory in China from which it ships to 29 countries. Last year it imported 60m crackers to the UK – nearly one for every person in the country.
And who writes the jokes? The company employs a network of freelancers, but anyone can contribute an idea. Even Fineman claims to have contributed a couple over the years, although he won’t reveal what they are. Maybe it’s the one about “tinsel-itis”.
Christmas has 12 days, and they are all brilliant, but Christmas Eve is the best of all. The anticipation of all that lovely downtime and TV and permissive snacking is as delicious now as it was when you were hyped up to the eyeballs at the excitement of waking up to a stocking on the end of the bed and eating chocolate coins in the dark with your little sister.
It is also the most elegant day of Christmas. Tomorrow is about stuffing endless recycling sacks with wrapping paper and gorging yourself until you can’t move, but today the presents are under the tree and you can still fit into your clothes. It is without doubt a day to dress up for.
Even – no, especially – if you are staying in. We get into the habit of dressing up to go out and dressing down to stay in. If I’m going out to dinner, I think about what to wear; if I’m at home, I think about what to cook. It’s just practicalities, really. Going upstairs to change for dinner is all very charming in Downton Abbey, but in the absence of downstairs staff, it’s hard to make it work without jeopardising the risotto.
But Christmas Eve deserves star treatment. I’m talking cashmere, velvet, sequins, feathers. I don’t care if your plans involve Nigella’s make-ahead bread sauce and the only outing on the agenda is a last-minute dash to the shops for AA batteries: this is a night to bring the glamour. And I mean the gratifying, pleasurable part of dressing up, not the breathe-in-and-think-of-England party dresses. Fabrics that feel good and look special, in shapes that are easy to wear.
I like the relaxed, cocktail-in-hand-hostess attitude of a pair of wide, loose trousers, which you can wear with a silk T-shirt or over a long-sleeved body. I love a cosy, curvy sweater dress, especially with polka-dot sheer tights. But this year I want a mermaid skirt. We associate sequins with a brazen, short-and-tight mode of dressing, but they come into their own when worn with grandeur. There is something magical about sparkly scales slinking about your ankles, especially when worn with a silky blouse. Tomorrow you can spend in your PJs and slippers, but tonight is when the magic happens.
My grandparents would take me out fishing in their boat once a week from when I about two or three, growing up in in Texas and Louisiana. I loved it. The biggest fish I ever caught was a 1,200lb marlin – but you name it, and I’ve caught it. I don’t get to go out as much these days, but I still enjoy it when I do. I find it calming.
For most of my childhood I had casts on both my feet. So I was always falling in the boat and knocking things overboard. There was never a dull moment on that boat. One time, I cast out and ended up hooking Poppa, my grandfather, in the head. He was sitting in the back, so I couldn’t see him. I just kept yanking and yanking and ended up setting the hook in his head. So we had to go to the hospital, and every time we hit a wave, it would send shocks down his spine. Poppa joked I’d caught the biggest fish of the day. It was pretty funny.
My grandfather started taking me hunting when I was six. We’d hunt deer. We wouldn’t always get stuff, but we enjoyed it. We’d drive out in the woods, make a camp and wake up at about 3am. I had my own rifle. I’ve only shot one deer in my life, though, when I was eight or nine.
My parents got divorced when I was nine months old, and my father would only pop in and see me once a year, if that. I don’t have much contact with him. He remarried when I was quite young and they had their own little family. He does his own thing. We are kind of estranged. But I don’t feel like he’s missing from my life. My mother and I are extremely close and we still live together, along with my 12-year-old sister, Lacey.
I didn’t know anything was wrong with me when I was growing up. I thought everyone went to occupational and speech therapy, I thought these were common things. I thought I was quite normal until I went to school and someone told me it wasn’t normal to have a disability. That was shocking to me. I asked my mom, why did this happen, why am I affected this way? She told me, and we moved on. You have to accept what can’t be fixed, and live for today like there’s not going to be a tomorrow.
My mother was paralysed for six years, from a month after my sister was born. She was in a car accident – a car ploughed into her at 40mph – and ruptured her spine. Afterwards, she couldn’t lift Lacey because of the operations she’d had. So I took care of Lacey. There’s a 12-year gap between us and her dad wasn’t really around, so I guess I was a bit of a father figure to her as well as a brother. I changed her diapers, made up her bottles, fed her, rocked her, bathed her - everything, I did it.
I had a lot of responsibility at the age of 12. By 13, I was the main breadwinner for my family. It was scary but necessary. I started off working as an extra, and I had to keep getting jobs to pay the bills. It evolved into a career very quickly. I think that accident changed our lives. It changed the dynamics of my relationship with my sister. Lacey is my baby, my little girl. We are still very close.
I take my sister everywhere with me. I’ll take her to dinner, to parties – anyplace I can bring her, I will. She’s 12 but looks like she’s 24 so I don’t have trouble getting her in anywhere. Despite the age gap, it feels like we have everything in common. We both like watching cartoons and playing video games, and we’ll make music together – she’s a singer. But of course, we have moments when we fight, that’s part of being brother and sister and living in the same house. It’s inevitable.
I was eight when I found out I was adopted. My step-brother told me. He’d overheard my mum and my stepdad at the time talking about it, and he threw it in my face. But I didn’t really care. It didn’t seem relevant, because I never once in my life felt unloved or like I was a burden.
I do and don’t want to trace my biological parents. If I find out, I find out. If I don’t, I don’t. I’m not really looking for them. I’ve got so many other problems that trying to find my biological parents is not something that I want to deal with right now. It’s not a priority ... unless they’re loaded. If they’re loaded and deceased, and I’m in a will somewhere, I’m all for it. Or if they’re part of the royal family, that would be pretty rad, too. Other than that, I don’t really care.
My mom and grandparents always said to me: you can do whatever you want. Can’t wasn’t an option for my grandfather. If I told him I couldn’t do something, he’d tell me I was going to do it. He’d say: because you told me you couldn’t do it, I’m going to force you to do it. If you want it enough, it can be done. He helped to make me who I am today.
RJ Mitte supports the disability charity Scope. The charity runs a Role Models programme in schools across the UK that educates young people about disability.
Syrian spinach pie, Afghan savoury rice, Tibetan dumplings - just a few of the dishes that customers at six restaurants in Strasbourg tried during this week’s Refugee Food Festival.
Across Strasbourg, restaurant owners have thrown open their kitchens and invited chefs who have fled Syria, Afghanistan and Tibet to use their ovens and pots and serve their favourite dishes from their homeland to customers.
For the refugee chefs, it is a joyful chance to show off the culture they have left behind. Iman Rahal and her husband Mohammed from Damascus are two of the refugee chefs that joined the festival, and are happy to have the chance to “show that Syria is more than just war”, as Rahal puts it. “I want people to know that we have a great culture and wonderful food.”
The menu they come up with for the La Ruche aux Deux Reines, a Strasbourg restaurant that serves food from all over the world, is tantalisingly mouthwatering; fattoush (a salad with fried bread), fatayer (spinach and cheese pie), kibbeh (bulgur balls) and three delicious desserts. The reaction from customers has been overwhelming; “I had to disappoint about 60 customers,” restaurant owner Vicky Djama says. “There simply isn’t enough space for everybody.”
She loves the idea of the Refugee Food Festival and jumped at the chance to take part. “I see it as an honour,” she says. “I always wanted to know more about Syrian cuisine. But more importantly, we are all concerned about what’s happening in Syria, but we haven’t got a clue when it comes to doing something. For me this is a great opportunity to actually do something: help these refugees to show their talents to the public.”
The festival was the initiative of Parisians Marine Mandrila and Louis Martin, who run an organisation called Food Sweet Food that specialises in forming connections between people through culinary events, books and documentaries. 
“The festival has three objectives,” Marine says. ‘First of all, we want to change the way people look at refugees. There are all these negative assumptions. We want to show that they are people like you and me, who have skills and talents and can contribute to society. Secondly, we want to introduce unknown cuisines to the French public. And thirdly, we want to help these refugee chefs to integrate and increase their job opportunities.” The initiative has been supported by the UN refugee agency and the city of Strasbourg.
For Iman and Mohammed the festival is an important occasion to introduce themselves to the public. They set up a little Syrian catering service at home a while ago, but hope to begin a real restaurant and are looking for a financier. “A real restaurant is our dream,” says Iman. “But for now we just hope to make the people who come to the festival very happy.” 
She has just heard that her sister, who is still in Syria and has applied for asylum in France, has to wait another three months. “All of our family members are still in Syria, so it’s not going to be a very joyful Christmas for us,” says Mohammed, who used to be an architect and ran a large building company in Syria, but lost everything. 
A few blocks away, in an Italian restaurant, chef Massimo Solinas is working with Dorje, a Tibetan refugee who for safety reasons doesn’t want his last name mentioned. The Italian chef has discovered, to his surprise, that Tibetan cuisine has a dish similar to ravioli, called momo. So he is offering his guests a menu that combines Tibetan momos and Italian ravioli.
The flamboyant Italian and the quiet Tibetan make an unusual but successful team. The restaurant telephone hasn’t stopped ringing. “I have decided to organise another Tibetan evening in January,’ Solinas says.
The customers who have been able to get a table are full of praise. An elderly lady who has come with her husband and three grown children says: “We travelled to India this year where we were introduced to Tibetan food and we really loved it. That was one reason to come. But we are also impressed to eat food that’s cooked by someone who has gone through so much and still has found the strength to share his culture with us.”
“The festival offers us a rare opportunity to taste Tibetan food”, says a young man in the back of the restaurant, who came together with three friends. “We didn’t know what to expect, but we love it.”
“It’s the food from my village,” Dorje explains. “My mother taught me how to fold momos which really is an art in itself. She is a great cook and I can’t tell you how much I miss her. Making momos is a way for me to be with her.” He pauses. “What is so important to me is that this festival offers me the chance to show that we Tibetans have our own culture and cuisine, contrary to what the Chinese would like you to believe.”
“I’m a migrant, just like Dorje,” Solinas says. “That’s something that connects us. Although our reasons were different, we both left our country. So we both know what it is when you live in one country and all of your family lives somewhere else.”
In yet another kitchen in the city, Afghan chef Ahmadzai is working hard in the Vietnamese restaurant Mandala. The initial idea was that he would cook for only one evening but the event attracted so much attention that restaurant owner Frédéric Muller asked him back. The dishes Mandala is serving tonight are a fusion of Asian and Afghan elements. 
Ahmadzai is afraid to talk to the press, so Frédéric does the talking. “For me it’s a natural thing to partake in the festival because my wife is Vietnamese and her parents came to France as refugees. Through them I have seen how difficult it is to find your place in a totally alien country.”
Working with Ahmadzai is easy, he says, because the Afghan had already gained experience in a Vietnamese restaurant in Norway. “Refugees can enrich our society, but in the media they are depicted as an invasion. I really want to contradict that lie.”
Asked why the festival attracts so many people, his wife Nicole To says: “People are curious. They want to try out food they have never tasted before. But I also think many people are genuinely concerned about the fate of refugees. And this is a way to show it.”
Later that evening Ahmadzai introduces himself to the customers with a short speech. “I really want to express my gratitude that you have come to eat my food,” he says. And when the guests give him a loud applause, he smiles.
The Refugee Food Festival is in Strasbourg until December 23. This month Food Sweet Food is launching a practical toolkit for people who want to organise a refugee food festival in their own city. For more information email contact@foodsweetfood.org
In June next year Food Sweet Food is planning a European Refugee Food Festival across 10 European cities.
When John Tereska’s Trump-voting family members open their gifts from him on Christmas Day, they will get a shock.
Inside pretty boxes they’ll find notes thanking them for making donations to organizations like Planned Parenthood and the Sierra Club that support causes expected to come under attack from the new administration.
“With my oldest brother, who I know voted for Trump, I’m going right for the jugular. I’m donating to the Democratic National Committee on his behalf,” Tereska said.
Tereska, an avid Hillary Clinton supporter, is so mad at the relatives who voted for Donald Trump in November that he’s giving money to progressive not-for-profit organizations in their names, in lieu of Christmas presents this year.
Many devastated Democrats have decided the best way to make a point to their loved ones with polar political views this holiday season is to put their money where they wish their relatives’ mouth were.
Ken Urban, a playwright who teaches part time at Princeton University and voted Democratic, has made donations to the Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC) on behalf of his parents as their Christmas gifts.
“My father was the Republican mayor of my small home town in New Jersey and spent his career in the navy reserve. My mother told me she would never vote for Hillary Clinton because they have a friend who works for the CIA who said she was ‘difficult’. And there are aunts and uncles and cousins in my family who voted for Trump,” said Urban.
He is ruing the fact that he and his boyfriend agreed, before the election, to attend a big family Christmas gathering for the first time in 20 years.
But the SPLC donations on behalf of his parents will take the sting out of it.
“I thought I could make a point and in the process be generous to a human rights cause that is only going to become more important now,” said Urban.
Some were inspired after hearing about donations to Planned Parenthood made in the name of Vice-President elect Mike Pence, who is fiercely against abortion. Pence is sent an acknowledgment from the family planning organization for every contribution.
Randi Greenwald, a retired lawyer in Portland, Maine, heard about the Pence idea and decided to put a more personal, local spin on the tactic.
Her son’s brother-in-law is Canadian but is a big fan of Trump and has been taunting the rest of the Democratic-leaning family ever since the real estate tycoon’s surprise win in November, she said.
“It meant more to me to make a revenge donation in this person’s name to a small cause locally,” she said.
Greenwald gave the money to her state branch of the Immigration Legal Advocacy Project, ILAP Maine, which assists people with their immigration cases, including asylum seekers and refugees.
“That’s his holiday gift this year,” she said. She’s bought regular presents for other members of the family.
Her Democratic-voting relatives are highly amused at the thought of him receiving a thank you letter from ILAP, she said.
“For me, if I don’t laugh, I’m going to cry,” she said.
Francie Schnipke, who works for a not-for-profit group in Chicago, is also supporting the SPLC – in the name of her Trump-voting older brother in rural Ohio.
He went from being a non-voter to a vocal Trump fan, despite the fact that their mother is Mexican and they have a family member with special needs, she said; they belong to two groups among many denigrated by Trump during the campaign.
She thinks the brother was swept along by the rhetoric of co-workers at his transportation company.
“He’s always been a loving brother and father. I’m reeling,” she said. “I think he was emboldened by the idea of the outsider coming to fix dysfunctional Washington.”
Now Schnipke hopes the information leaflets the SPLC will send her brother will “give him pause”, she said.
Tereska, an operations analyst for a fashion retailer in New York, isn’t only giving “revenge donations”. His sister voted for Clinton, so she is getting a “love donation” to the Human Rights Campaign for LGBT equality.
But the majority of his family members will get gifts that he thinks they’ll perceive as hostile.
“My father wrote in John McCain on his ballot, so I take that as a vote for Trump. My mother will not talk about it, so I assume she voted for Trump. They are getting donations to Planned Parenthood,” Tereska said.
“I’m still grappling with the result of the election and this is my small slice of revenge for the fact that their votes have just jeopardized me and the entire world for the next four years.”
Our family home in Shimoda, in Japan’s Shizuoka prefecture, was built by an American, so it looked western from the outside. But inside it was typically Japanese.
We didn’t have chairs, so when I was younger I dreamed of being able to live in a western house, to sit on a chair and drink coffee or to eat a baguette off a white plate. We always sat in a tatami-mat room right next to the kitchen.
My husband’s parents had an ultra‑ modern home – his father was an English teacher and his mother liked candles and wore perfume. It was a great contrast to the understated environment I grew up in. They also ate western-style food.
In our home, we usually ate traditional Japanese meals of rice, vegetables and fish, and only a little meat. We lived near the sea, so we also ate a lot of horse mackerel and kinmedai (golden-eye sea bream), usually raw as sashimi.
We often ate a seaweed dish called hijiki, plus lots of simmered dishes using kiriboshi daikon (dried daikon radish, which is rehydrated when used in cooking) and other dried goods. My mother was adept at using those in her cooking. She put sesame seeds into miso soup, spinach, cabbage, hijiki … just about everything. I remember her sitting on the kitchen floor with a pestle and mortar, grinding the seeds into a paste. She did it so often that, over time, the mortar made a dent in the doorframe.
Those days were the origins of the cookery I do now – a mixture of Japanese influences from home and western touches I learned after I met my husband.
I started cooking for my mother and father when I was at senior high school. I cooked for them a lot until I got married when I was 26. My father loved to drink sake, so we always made him small dishes that pair well with it, like mackerel in miso or chopped raw horse mackerel.
The dish that reminds me of him most, however, is fried chicken with leek sauce. I came up with it to make him happy, but it has become a favourite dish among my readers, too. It’s not quite a Chinese dish, but it’s not really Japanese either.
My father was so amazed by the taste and used to say: “This is the best chicken I have ever had.” In fact, he wasn’t that keen on chicken – so it’s a testament to how much he liked this recipe. Anyone can make it: all you need is a few easy-to-come-by seasonings, some chicken – frozen will do – and a single leek.
When I became known for my cooking, I travelled a lot. I was always busy, so my parents couldn’t see me whenever they wanted. In that respect, I think they were a little sad about my success.
1 Pierce the chicken all over with a fork so it will better absorb the seasoning. Mix the soy sauce with the sake, then pour this over the chicken, making sure it seeps well into the meat. Set aside while you prepare the leek sauce.
2 To make the leek sauce, combine the soy, vinegar, sake and sugar in a bowl. In a pan, lightly fry the chopped leek in some heated oil, then pour in the soy sauce mixture and chopped red chilli and stir together until the sugar has dissolved. Remove from the heat and set aside.
3 Coat the chicken with the potato starch, then deep-fry in oil at 180C/350F. For crispier chicken, raise it out of the oil from time to time. When fried to a golden brown, cut the chicken into bite-size pieces. Serve dressed with the leek sauce. I sometimes accompany this with some lettuce.
This year, without consulting me, my wife sent an email to both of our families, explaining that we didn’t want presents for Hannukah, and were not going to buy them either. Instead, she made a generous donation to Doctors Without Borders on behalf of our extended family. It was the type of selfless act my wife regularly does, and one of the reasons I love her deeply. Yet my first reaction was to read the email and think: “Wait a minute … I like presents!”.
I feel her pain. At this time of the year, the front of our house is a loading dock, where random gifts and goods are deposited by deliverymen daily. As an avowed advocate of analog goods, our living room teems with toppling piles of books and magazines, records, photographs and board games that I stockpile for winter, like a greedy little squirrel.
In the layer cake of our household crap, my stuff is merely the icing. The substance of our clutter is a plastic carpeting of our daughter’s toys (largely of the Disney princess variety), which, like Houdini, cannot be restrained by any form of containment. They burst forth from their appointed cupboards and boxes to bring unicorn joy to every corner of the home, mysteriously covering all dark fabrics in a thin veneer of glitter, like it’s Sunday morning at some awful disco.
Her four-month-old brother brings his own brand of consumption overload, in the form of of scattered toe crushing bouncy chairs and bright squeaky things that we have yet to write thank you notes for. And blankets. Countless barf-covered blankets.
And so, when the doorbell rings and a newly-wrapped present passes the threshold, my wife rolls her eyes at the latest addition to this cornucopia of tchochkes, and mourns once more that Marie Kondo dream of a sparse, perfectly joyful house.
A few years ago, as the online economy took off, a lot of gift-giving shifted to the intangible. People wanted to simultaneously fulfill our desire to give and receive, but without all that stuff. My birthday came and I wasn’t sent envelopes or boxes, but emails with gift credit to iTunes, a membership to a music streaming service and plenty of what people once called E-Cards.
But something was missing: the material joy of actual presents.
Presents aren’t supposed to be easy. The effort required to think about and procure them can be arduous. It requires knowledge of both the market and the target, and relies on the strength of your own taste and the relationship with the recipient. But I draw great pleasure from the challenge.
Each gift is something I obsess over, as a tangible test of my relationship. The hunt is a gauntlet to run, but it’s half the fun. Sweating in a down jacket, wool hat and slush-covered boots in a bookstore, or, god forbid, shopping mall, searching for the things to tick off my list ... this is a test of the relationship at the core of the exchange.
Sure, I can effortlessly order the same thing online, maybe even for cheaper, but this challenge brings me out onto the streets. It forces me to get face to face with the holiday season, to wrestle down its schmaltzy optimism and even embrace it, finding some joy in the lights, the shop windows and the blast of Mariah Carey’s voice that will not stop chasing me, no matter what store I enter.
I also love the stakes of giving a real gift. When you email someone a present, the reaction is strictly textual, and largely neutral, like wishing someone “HBD” on Facebook, instead of calling them on their birthday. But when you present someone with a box, or an envelope, you enter a game, where every facial expression holds the potential of failure or success.
The best moment is the very second someone takes a gift in their hand, and holds it for that brief, respectful second. It’s a moment full of pregnant wonder, when the wrapping could hide just about anything, and there’s a slight temptation to just leave it intact, in case reality ruins that hope.
But they do tear it open. We all do. Because while presents are cluttering, and wasteful, and largely destined to go back to the same store for a credit (or the thrift shop), they also embody something so irresistible about the human experience, that cannot be replicated virtually.
Gifts are one of the few symbols of love –that most ephemeral of feelings– that we can lay our hands on and pass on to others. They are tangible totems of something that gives us pleasure, and make us feel loved, and meaningful, no matter how irrational or selfish that sounds.
Please give to charity, do good works, and don’t clog the world with more stuff. But then be sure to give those who matter a little something they can hold. It means a lot to them, and to you.
Christmas is hereditary; you get it from your parents. When I was growing up, Christmas meant getting to open one present after midnight mass and having to wait until after morning service for the rest. It meant hoping that no one would decide they wanted to talk to the vicar – my mother – after church, further delaying both presents and food. On some occasions, it meant an extra guest round the table and not being able to open your presents until they had left – those were the worst Christmases.
It also meant anything other than turkey, which my mother saw as an unnecessary faff alongside everything. But as far as my partner is concerned, Christmas means turkey, stuffing and cranberry sauce. Fortunately, Delia is on hand to help this year – the first time we are hosting Christmas – with an hour-by-hour guide to the final 36 hours of the perfect festive dinner.
I start with the stuffing. Now, there are some ingredients that always fill me with dread, and stale bread is one. Happening to have bread that is neither fresh nor furry feels like a level of preparation that I have yet to manage. Having eaten the last of the bread for breakfast, I head to the shops and use a fresh slice, with no noticeable problems. Delia’s recipe for stuffing is easy – make breadcrumbs in your processor, add the sage and onion, then take it all out and mix it with the sausage meat. And there you have your stuffing, which you can bung into the fridge until you need it.
Delia recommends that you make the cranberry sauce the night before, but it keeps well for about a fortnight, so you can make it whenever. It’s simplicity itself – just cranberries, sugar and port in a pan and hey presto!
Not so simple is the turkey. Delia’s recipe provides an hour-by-hour breakdown of exactly how to cook your turkey. It is when I see that the first time on Delia’s timetable is 7.45am that my heart sinks. I’m aware that, at this point, anyone with a child under 10 will have broken into mirthless laughter at the idea that a 7.45am start on Christmas morning is excessively early. I know this because I made the mistake of complaining about the early start to my mother. No power on Earth could move me to start cooking lunch if I have to face outer screaming from small children. The whole thing is stressful enough when all I have to drown is my own inner screaming.
According to Delia, the important thing is to get both turkey and stuffing to room temperature by leaving both in a cool, dry place, which, considering the size of our flat and the turkey, is trickier than it sounds. Even getting it in the fridge requires a wholesale reordering of the interior to accommodate the thing. After much fretting, I leave it, covered over, in the bathroom. At the time of writing, none of my guests have keeled over, so I’m going to say it has been a success.
I preheat the oven, then stuff the turkey. Then, as per Delia’s instructions, I start peeling the potatoes ready for roasting, before leaving them in a pan, just covered in water, to boil later. “At this point, everything should be under control,” Delia writes, “so you can take time out of the kitchen to help the kids unwrap their presents, have a coffee or tidy the house.” I must admit that if, having got up at horrible o’clock, stuffed a turkey and peeled potatoes, my partner expected me to tidy the house, I would consult a divorce lawyer. Happily, the matter doesn’t arise, so, reasoning that it’s Christmas, I help myself to a drink.
“Pop the plates into the warming oven,” Delia writes. Not for the first time, I contemplate the gulf between the kitchen in my flat and the kitchen that Delia thinks I have. The turkey is so large that there is barely room for it and the roast potatoes in the bottom oven, so Delia’s all-in-one baked vegetables (of which, more below) are going in the top oven – which, to be honest, I’m not 100% certain is in working order. My partner, with the confidence of a woman who hasn’t used the oven since David Cameron was prime minister, assures me that it does work. I hope she’s right and help myself to another drink. Still, I reason that anyone who complains about cold plates can leave the flat via the balcony – and I elect not to warm my plates.
I spend the next hour fretting about whether the top oven works, and helping myself to increasingly larger glasses of port as our guests arrive. The more cunning of them ask if they can help out at all, while the more transparent ones content themselves with asking flatly what it is they have to do to be namechecked in the Guardian.
I take the turkey out to rest and whack the potatoes in the oven, before turning to the all-in-one baked vegetables. This is one of Delia’s clever tricks to avoid having to put the vegetables on the hob at that critical juncture when everything else – turkey, roast potatoes, sprouts – need to be either taken out of the oven, basted, parboiled or in some way interfered with. In other words, it saves on hob space. Simply add a little vinaigrette, salt and pepper, cover the vegetables in foil, bung them in the oven at the time you take the turkey out, and they’ll be ready when you take the potatoes out of the oven.
That done, all that’s left is to saute your chestnuts for the brussels sprouts. This is a recipe where instead of using one item of cookware for your sprouts, you first parboil them in one pan before sautéing them in another with chestnuts and shallots.
I spend the meal beaming every time someone says something nice about the turkey, fretting about whether I remembered to put all those pans in to soak, and hoping that someone will notice I have done something special to the sprouts.
No-one does. So there you are, folks: that’s what you’d have had to do get a shout-out in these pages. Still, a very happy Christmas – it wouldn’t have been half as fun without you.
When your family get together at Christmas, do you find yourself feeling as though you are re-experiencing childhood dramas? Do you feel you’re taking on a role, reverting to Christmas past? You may even feel as though you are reading from an invisible script and repeating interactions with family members that leave you feeling frustrated and angry.
We may consider ourselves to be autonomous adults who have carved out our own independent lives. But when the holidays loom, many find themselves dreading predictably damaging and repetitious scenarios with family. These unnerving interactions often include put-downs, competitiveness, control freakery and passive aggression.
Lots of us have a family member whom we find particularly goading and who pushes all the right buttons to zone right in on our most vulnerable responses. Although we promise ourselves (and others) that this year we will be different and we will not become entangled in an argument we cannot win, we still find ourselves drawn into the same old scenarios with the usual suspects, and responding to them in familiar, ineffective ways.
Christmas can be a time when we find ourselves particularly locked in a role that we thought we had discarded long ago. In my case, I grew up in a family in which “emotional perfectionism” – being upbeat and positive – was obligatory and served as an effective camouflage to distract from our father’s severe winter depressions.
If this sounds familiar, sit down and write out an example of a scenario that you experienced last year, noting what the situation was, what your family member said and how you responded. Then note how this made you feel. You may find this exercise surprisingly easy because the same scenarios tend to have been repeated since childhood. That is because we know our script, and that of our relatives, all too well.
How can we change these scripts, without upsetting others? Re-writing can be extremely helpful, and can turn a challenging get-together into a much more enjoyable one. Yet we often hold ourselves back because we feel that certain behaviour is expected of us by others. We don’t want to rock the boat at a big family occasion. But often our worries about this are exaggerated, and you may find that, by making a few changes in your personal script, you can experience a greater sense of control over these upsetting encounters. The following tips might help:
If your family member always pushes your buttons about your health, your life choices or your children, consider alternative ways of responding, and mentally rehearse your new lines of response before your relative arrives.
Another person will probably have witnessed these scenarios many times, and the distress that they cause you. Discuss your concerns about the upcoming holiday, and see if they have ideas or solutions that might be helpful. They could even keep an eye out during the holidays to make sure you feel supported when you are trying out new ways of dealing with troublesome family.
Remember that you don’t have to tolerate abuse or belittling comments from family members. Just because they’ve succeeded in making you feel bad for decades doesn’t mean this pattern has to continue forever. Try not to rise to their bait. Leave the room and get some fresh air if you are feeling trapped by them.
Our adrenaline can build up when we are dreading these encounters and can often cause us to shake, or waver in our resolve to handle things differently. Start practising controlled breathing and mindfulness exercises before the guests arrive, and talk to yourself like a supportive coach. Thinking “I can handle this” is much more helpful than a constant cycle of worry and “Oh no, here we go again …”
Holidays are stressful enough without finding ourselves caught in the trap of replicating outdated family dynamics and negative interactions. A bit of preparation, self-calming, and alternative strategies are a way of rescuing yourself from tedious, but undermining, family roles.
Stefano Gajani Billi, a 55-year-old Roman with roots in the northern Italian region of Emilia-Romagna, has been eating homemade cappelletti for Christmas lunch for as long as he can remember.
The “little hats” of meat-filled pasta used to be made exclusively by Gajani Billi’s grandmother, but the tradition has since been taken over by Stefano himself, along with his mother, sister, wife and their children. Every December they convene for a cappelletti-making bonanza, where proceedings are dominated by two strict rules.
First, no shortcuts are tolerated. The filling requires at least five different meats, the pasta is made from scratch, and the broth in which the cappelletti will eventually be boiled has to be made from a capon, a castrated rooster.
Second, once the pasta dough has been folded over the filling, only Gajani Billi’s sister, Elena – the boss of the operation since the deaths of their grandmother and then father – is allowed to close the cappelletti, all 500 of them. The final twist must come from her well-trained fingers, she says, otherwise they may fall apart.
“It’s a family moment, in remembrance of my father and also my grandmother,” Gajani Billi says. “Also, it is the best thing you can eat in your life.”
Such Christmas meals are pillars of Italy’s rich culinary tradition. While the definition of a “typical” festive lunch varies from region to region, dishes such as cappelletti have been considered staples for centuries.
But that is changing. According to one Rome-based food writer, many labour-intensive Italian food traditions are dying off, especially in the south, largely because of economic factors that have led to the depopulation of villages and towns where the dishes used to be made.
“When people speak about food here nostalgically, they talk about their grannies. The mom might not be able to make those dishes, or she might just buy them. And the grandkids certainly don’t know how to make them,” says Katie Parla. “It’s not that people who are under 60 don’t cook, but they definitely don’t do it as intensively as they once did.”
The list of so-called endangered Italian foods – a topic on which Parla is now writing a book – is long and includes savoury dishes, sweets, and even digestifs and liquors.
Some of the most labour-intensive foods are broths, such as the one used to cook cappelletti on Christmas Day. Some broths require an assortment of meats, which are boiled in different pots so the liquid is a perfect blend of flavours.
Making the broth and then the bollito misto – mixed boiled meats that are served after the first dish – is a big job, Parla says, especially considering that a host would also be expected to prepare deep-fried vegetables for a Christmas antipasto.
Traditionally, that antipasto would include vegetables that were prepared in the summer and then preserved.
In the southern region of Molise, Parla has visited a town called Civita, where a special shortbread biscuit is made with a pasta frolla crust and a filling of flour, breadcrumbs, spices and red wine. What makes the biscuits unique is their elaborate decoration using a crimping tool. In one town, which now has just 400 residents, the only people left who make the biscuits are one baker and her daughter.
“When those women stop making those cookies, no one will be making them,” Parla says. “There they have an expression: ‘when she dies, the world dies’.”
But Parla, an American who has lived in Rome for many years, does not think the situation is hopeless. Her book will tackle what may be considered a sensitive topic in households trying to preserve traditions: is it OK to cut corners?
“In my opinion, it is one of the best ways of preserving a tradition,” Parla says. “Because if you trap a recipe in amber and require a huge number of steps, yes, it is beautiful if you can devote time and resource to it. But if you can’t, cutting corners means you are not eliminating it altogether, you are just evolving into another thing.”
In the case of Gajani Billi’s Christmas lunch, that could mean buying the cappelletti and focusing on making the broth. Or it could mean buying pasta dough instead of making it. “We can still evoke the importance of those recipes on certain days if we preserve them in a simplified way,” Parla says.
Ingredients: Fresh pasta dough (For 300 cappelletti, use 5 eggs and about a pound of flour)
1 To make the filling: in a pan of olive oil and rosemary, cook a turkey breast, 100g of mortadella, one pork chop, one sausage (casing removed), and guanciale (pork jowl). Blend the meats together and then mix in grated parmigiano reggiano and stracchino cheese. Also add 2-3 eggs and nutmeg. Refrigerate overnight.
2 Place a small dollop of the filling in the middle of a small circular piece of pasta dough. Fold the pasta in half and squeeze the sides of the pasta together. Bring the two edges of the pasta together and pinch them shut. Flip the cappelletto around and gently fold the sides down, so that it resembles a little hat.
3 For the broth: boil a capon. Remove the capon and then boil the cappelletti for about 20 minutes. Serve with the broth.
This tree’s jolly red berries and prickly leaves adorn every conceivable piece of Christmas paraphernalia, from napkins to wrapping paper. And yet one of the oft-asked questions when it comes to this tree in the garden is “why doesn’t my holly have any berries?” The plant family Ilex - of which the European holly Ilex aquifolium is a member - consists mostly of dioecious plants, meaning there are distinct male and female specimens, and only the female bears berries - and that’s provided there’s a male plant in the vicinity.
There are exceptions: I. aquifolium ‘Pyramidalis’ and ‘JC van Tol’ are both self-fertile, so they don’t need another plant for cross pollination and can produce berries all on their own. Their leaves are also much less spiny than regular I. aquifolium, which may or may not appeal. For more information on the vast range of hollies for gardens, check out this feature by Naomi Slade from the Guardian archive .
Non-festive fact: if you suffer from cats defecating on your seed beds, try laying some holly branches (preferably as spiny as possible - pyracantha is another option if you don’t have holly) across the bare soil. They won’t come near.
What is a Christmas tree, exactly? The term is a catchall for an awful lot of different species around the world. In New Zealand, a tree that features on many a Christmas card is Metrosideros excelsa, a member of the myrtle family known to Maori people as pohutukawa. Settlers, noting its habit of producing beautiful red bottlebrush flowers around Christmas time, dubbed it the New Zealand Christmas tree. It’s too tender to grow outside in the UK unless you happen to live in the Isles of Scilly. In San Francisco, on the other hand, it grows rather too well. Australia has the New South Wales Christmas bush, Ceratopetalum gummiferum: it too turns red in December, although the colour is the result of the sepals of the seed capsules, not the preceding flowers, which are white.
Back in Britain, the Christmas tree tradition, though it’s been going strong over several centuries, has embraced more than a dozen different trees. The needle-shedding Christmas tree of my youth, the Norway spruce (Picea abies), has gradually been elbowed out of British front rooms in favour of other trees that hang onto their foliage far longer - the Nordmann fir (Abies nordmanniana) leading the way, followed by the noble fir (Abies nobilis), the blue spruce (Picea pungens Glauca Group), and most recently the Fraser fir (Abies fraseri).
The origins of the practice of decorating a tree for Christmas are far from clear, but most agree it originates in central Europe, perhaps some time in the 1500s. Even in his 1850 short story The Christmas Tree, Charles Dickens refers to it as “that pretty German toy” (you can hear Simon Callow read this tale aloud here). If you want to read more about its history, I highly recommend the book Inventing the Christmas Tree by Bernd Brunner. For a different perspective, try palaeobotanist Susannah Lydon’s blogpost on the Christmas tree as a survivor from Mesozoic times.
For strictly practical advice on keeping your real Christmas tree alive as long as possible, try the British Christmas Tree Growers Association.
As festive customs go, the yule log has fared far worse than the Christmas tree. In the dining hall of Hever Castle in Kent hangs the nineteenth century painting Yule Log by Robert Alexander Hillingford. A man and a boy use ropes to haul a hefty section of the trunk of an oak tree, preceded by a prancing spaniel. They are headed for a huge fireplace, where this giant log will be burn from Christmas Eve right through until Twelfth Night. And there’s the rub, for us in the 21st century, where such fireplaces are a relative rarity, replaced by modern contrivances such as radiators and underfloor heating.
But of course the yule log predates Christmas anyway, having its origins in pagan winter solstice celebrations that took place across Europe in many variations, where a tree or log (oak or ash in England, but different woods elsewhere - cherry in France, for instance), was burned to ward off evil spirits. There’s much more detail to delve into on regional variations of the yule log tradition in Chambers’ Book of Days.
Today, you’re much more likely to be enjoying the chocolate replica, or if you are in the US, watching the now-traditional TV broadcast of a burning yule log. If you fancy making your very own a chocolate yule log, here’s the perfect recipe.
Boswellia may not be a familiar treename to you, but you will know the fragrant gum resin drawn from the trees of this genus from its key role in Christmas carols and nativity plays. Frankincense was one of the gifts bought by the three kings to the infant Jesus, according to the book of Matthew in the Bible.
My favourite Frankincense fact is that the Egyptians called it “sweat of the gods fallen to earth”. In fact it was highly valued by several cultures in ancient times, including the Romans, the Greeks and the Babylonians. For a full account of its uses, visit Marquette University’s Historians@Work blog.
Frankincense is still prized today, as an ingredient for making incense, for cosmetics, perfumes and so on. The boswellia tree still grows wild Oman, Ethiopia, Somalia, and Yemen, and it is harvested in the same way as ancient times: the bark is cut and the resin that exudes is collected. Unfortunately Boswellia sacra is classed as near-threatened on the IUCN red list of endangered species. If you would like to see one of these trees in the flesh, there is a specimen of B. sacra growing in the Princess of Wales conservatory at Kew Gardens in London.
Myrhh is the product of another family of trees, Commiphora, that grow in the same part of the world as Boswellia. It’s another gum resin that is used for just the same purposes as frankincense: incense, perfumes, medicines and the like. In fact both trees are members of the Burseraceae or incense tree family.
Read the verse about myrhh in the carol We Three Kings of Orient Are and the role of this “bitter perfume” as a symbol of death is clear: Jesus’s body was embalmed with pounds of it, according to the account in John 19 (myrhh means “bitter” in Arabic). Like Boswellia, Commiphora is a shrubby desert tree: it is adapted to the harsh conditions with spines to discourage grazing animals. If you fancy trying to grow your own myrhh tree, you can buy a young Commiphora myrrha seedling from The Curious Plant Company in the UK, but bear in mind you will need to grow it as a houseplant so you’re unlikely to be harvesting resin from it.
 The trees came first – five ancient oaks amid which this trinity of pods in Beaminster, Dorset, has arisen in homage. When it rains the stainless steel gutters water said trees. Less fortunate oaks were sacrificed to construct the cladding, floors and the decked areas that wrap round each pod and extend the main rooms into the garden when the glass doors are open. The impression is of three humble holiday cabins floating just above the gravel on this hilltop. Look closer and they’re connected by glass and wood walkways. Photographs by Humberts
Nativity scenes are the art we see at Christmas, often on cards that put a masterpiece on the mantelpiece. Baby it’s cold outside, so let’s warm our hearts with a bit of Piero della Francesca or Bruegel.
Yet we close our eyes to the reality of this art. We turn Renaissance and baroque paintings into empty kitsch when we appropriate them as part of modern Christmas celebrations, which in truth have little in common with the much more religious world that created these images.
Look a bit harder and the great paintings of the nativity story that we sentimentalise at Christmas are full of death and decay. Some are are literally apocalyptic. Far from soppy, painted equivalents of a modern school nativity play, these paintings are premonitory visions of suffering that invite the most serious of meditations.
The world is ending. It is in ruins. A civilisation is collapsing around us. That is the setting of Leonardo da Vinci’s Adoration of the Magi and many more depictions of the infancy of Christ. In Leonardo’s unfinished Adoration, the enigmatic ruins of wondrous buildings stand behind Mary and her child. Staircases lead to nowhere. Trees grow out of the crumbling structure. These ruins represent the decay of the classical pagan world. With Christ’s coming, the pagan age is over; its achievements – which Renaissance artists revered – must all fall into ruin. Leonardo goes further. He also depicts a distant cavalry battle to suggest the violence of history from which Christ has come to promise deliverance.
Other paintings show the ruins of Rome in a way that is eerie and bleak, suggesting that as well as hope, the nativity also brings a painful ending of old ways. As TS Eliot puts it in his poem Journey of the Magi, “this Birth was hard and bitter agony for us, like Death, our death”.
Eliot’s great, uneasy poem, about the pain as well as hope the Magi feel in seeing a revelation that leaves them uncomfortable in the “old dispensation”, is very close to the true spirit of Renaissance paintings. In Pieter Bruegel the Elder’s harsh portrayal of the three kings, they are exhausted old men, withered stumps of time, their myopic and senile faces unable to truly understand what they have seen.
Their gifts are troubling. Myrrh was used for embalming – it prefigures Christ’s death. Even without that clue, the fact that Christ has been born to suffer for human sins is not hard to see. In Leonardo’s Adoration, he reaches out to accept a gift as if accepting his fate. Part of the reason this painting is so potent as an unfinished work is that the uncoloured shadows evoke mortal thoughts.
Yet we don’t just ignore dark hints in paintings of the nativity – at Christmas we glide completely over a part of the story that artists in the past portrayed with the same insight they brought to the stable scene. You won’t find the Massacre of the Innocents on any Christmas cards, but it was painted as acutely as any nativity image by Bruegel, Rubens or Poussin.
Herod’s massacre of the firstborn does not fit our heartwarming image of Christmas. Unfortunately nor do nativity scenes, if we look at them with both eyes open. Caravaggio’s Adoration of the Shepherds includes a brilliant still life of a set of carpenter’s tools in the foreground. Is this just a nice allusion to Joseph’s job as a carpenter? Of course not. It is also a forewarning that one day such tools will be used to build a cross for Christ to die on.
The seriousness of this birth is such that some artists simply shun cuddly domestic detail and portray it in an utterly sombre way as a moment of revelation. Piero della Francesca’s Nativity portrays Mary not nursing her child but kneeling on the earth to pray to and for him. The shepherds keep a respectful distance in front of a stable so humble and broken down that it places this mystical moment outside all human comfort. Only a choir of angels brings a silent music of joy.
Sandro Botticelli goes even further. His Mystic Nativity sees the holy birth not in cute human terms but as the event that ultimately foretells the Last Judgment, the end of days and the coming of a new heaven and a new earth. Devils flee into hell as angels soar aloft.
Of course Renaissance and baroque artists find joy and hope in the nativity. Angels rejoice, dumb animals recognise the weight of this moment, and all eyes are on the child who will redeem the world. It doesn’t have much in common with the festive fun of our modern, highly secularised and commercial Christmas. These paintings are about death and resurrection and the shock of revelation. That nativity scene on a card is an opportunity for a moment of meditation amid the tinsel. More Silent Night than Jingle Bells.
 Actually-quite-nice, non-garish Christmas jumpers are possible: think vaguely geometric graphics, muted earth tones and boxier knits. You could wear them beyond the festive period, even. Ideal for hiding the handsome ‘turkey baby’ you’ve acquired over Christmas, which is always a bonus.
Each Christmas, I place a stack of books on my bedside table, planning to read my way through the lot during my week off. And each Christmas, without fail, they remain precisely where I put them as I turn to old favourites instead: Dickens, Christie, Streatfeild, Rowling, Lewis. Christmas, after all, is a time for tradition. An unfamiliar book, like a new film or an untested recipe, has little place on my Christmas Day.
From childhood, this has been my favourite time of year. Although I grew up in Australia, where Christmas Day regularly reaches 30 degrees, I relished stories where the characters are surrounded by snow, warming their hands by the fire. I have great affection for the platters of prawns, fruit-topped pavlovas and glorious sunshine I remember from my childhood Christmases – but it never felt like anything I saw in my favourite books.
Once I moved to England, much of the comfort and familiarity in the Christmases I have spent here comes from my books; on my bedside table, and in my kitchen. Here, the roast bird, the flaming plum pudding and the pastel-hued sweets so often found in stories make complete sense.
Sherlock Holmes glanced sharply across at me with a slight shrug of his shoulders. “There is your hat, then, and there your bird,” said he. “By the way, would it bore you to tell me where you got the other one from? I am somewhat of a fowl fancier, and I have seldom seen a better grown goose.” The Adventure of the Blue Carbuncle by Arthur Conan Doyle
Roasted goose was the Christmas bird of choice for most middle-class families in Victorian England and this is reflected in literature: the plot of Conan Doyle’s The Adventure of the Blue Carbuncle hangs on a Christmas goose, and Dickens’s Cratchit family in A Christmas Carol eke one out with mashed potato and stuffing.
Though turkey was financially out of reach for most English families until the mid-20th century, the bird has long been associated with Christmas. Henry VIII is rumoured to have placed one on his Christmas table, and Edward VII made it a fashionable choice for the wealthy in the early years of last century. It also plays an important role in A Christmas Carol: Ebenezer Scrooge’s fowl gift to Bob and his family on Christmas Day is indicative of his newfound generosity.
This moment in fiction has had a lasting legacy; around 75% of us will have turkey this year, a truly staggering figure (especially if you share my opinion that a humble roast chicken is a vastly superior bird). Modern fiction continues to reflect this – think of the turkey curry buffet in Bridget Jones’s Diary (a little better than Bridget’s blue soup).
My great-grandmother spent long days each August boiling puddings in calico, and hanging them all over her house to dry. It’s a tradition the rest of our family has adopted. We’re in good company; the plum pudding has its origins in medieval England, and is still a common feature on Christmas tables across the country. I have lost count of the number of fictional families who finish their Christmas dinner with a pudding: the dessert is carried out by Percy in Lucy M Boston’s The Children of Green Knowe, enjoyed by the Fossil sisters in Noel Streatfeild’s Ballet Shoes, and appears in the Great Hall at the end of Harry’s first Christmas in Hogwarts.
Nothing feels more like Christmas to me than dishes, tins and bowls of sweets, placed at intervals around the house. At no other time of year does every retreat to the sofa involve a couple of Quality Street or mini Daim bars. If I am feeling slightly more ambitious, I’ll make the sweets that I read about: crystallised ginger from Agatha Christie’s The Adventure of the Christmas Pudding, sugar plums from A Visit from St Nicholas by Clement Clarke Moore, and soft pink cubes of Turkish Delight in CS Lewis’s The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe. Now, I can’t spend Christmas in Narnia with the Pevensie children, or solving crimes with Hercule Poirot – but it reassures me to see them similarly taken with decadent sweets.
Food serves many functions in literature, providing us with a strong sense of time and place. From my years of reading about it, I felt I understood Christmas in England long before I ever experienced it. Moving to the UK was not unlike stepping through the wardrobe into Narnia; leaving the comfort of the familiar for the relative unknown. I spent much of my first year finding my feet. But that first Christmas, I lived the day that I had spent so many years dreaming about – and ate the meals I had spent so many years reading about.
We’ve been on the long, slow, slide to Christmas since Halloween’s ghosts and skeletons packed up their sheets and bones for another year.
Our readers have again kindly documented the more underwhelming images of the season.
It’s not late to send in your images - our assignment will be open until it’s time to take the Christmas tree down to the skip.
Thanks to everyone who took part again this year. Merry Christmas.
Winter Wonderland is an annual event in London’s Hyde park with fairground rides, Christmas stalls, markets and entertainment for all ages. Security at major landmarks and events has been increased following the attack in the Berlin market outside the Kaiser Wilhelm memorial church
My dining table was my father’s workbench. On Boxing Day we used it as a buffet and invited friends - Michael Caine, Paul McCartney, Peter Blake. This is what I’ve learned from those parties
Len Deighton is the author of the Action Cookbook and French Cooking for Men (HarperCollins)
Garden centres go through a metamorphosis at this time of year. Over a series of weeks, everything changes: shovels are pushed toward the margins of the store, bags of composts hide themselves in corners, and the few real plants that are left get lined up near a back fence, like mutinous soldiers waiting for a firing squad. The space is then filled with dancing Santas and scented candles. There are both real and imitation trees in mindboggling varieties; from fresh-cut Norway spruces to fibre optic trees which change colour and freakishly rotate. There are ornaments and flashing lights and roasting tins for a turkey dinner. Yesterday I stood, in a kind of hypnotic trance, watching a plastic reindeer sing Jingle Bells. I couldn’t take my eyes off it. In short, during Christmas, our garden centres rarely feel like garden centres. However, if you’re a plantoholic like myself, don’t despair, because now is the perfect time to buy bare-root plants.
Bare-root plants are plants which have been, unlike their container-grown cousins, grown in open ground. In the winter time, when the plants go dormant, nurseries dig them up and package them ready for transplant. Some nurseries will simply send you the roots and stems wrapped in plastic or burlap. Other nurseries pot up the plant, as the soil helps to keep the roots in better condition. Either way, you are buying the skeleton of the plant – the structural bits which really matter.
The problem with buying bare-root is that plants are obviously less exciting in their dormant state. Buying plants in December is like going on a date with someone who is wearing their dressing gown and slippers; you need to be able to see the potential. And this is where the internet and catalogues become a wonderful way to shop for plants. Online you can look at pictures of plants in their prime. In catalogues you can gape at glossy images of perennials in full flower, or lust after photos of delicious strawberries ripe for the picking. Wintertime, with its short days and long nights, is a time for dreaming. I recently ordered two rambling roses with the purpose of covering an unsightly fence. Online I could look at pictures of ramblers running over archways and trellises, bursting in creams and pinks in their midsummer glory. I could scroll through pages of choices and look at detailed descriptions of each plant. I could do the thing that all gardeners do best over the winter months – I could imagine.
Besides the fun of buying, there are a number of practical benefits when you order your plants bare-root. Often they’re cheaper. It takes a nursery far more time and effort to look after pot-grown plants then to dig a plant up from a field. In addition, when ordering plants you aren’t paying a courier to deliver a heavy pot of compost. Then there’s the fact that when you order bare-root plants you often have a much greater selection to pick from. Online or in catalogues, you can more easily shop around and come to an informed decision, instead of making an impulse purchase because a plant in full bloom batted its eyelashes at you. This all means that you’re more likely to choose, as they say, the right plant for the right place. Finally, bare-root plants are often easier to plant and, once established, grow more vigorously than their container grown counterparts. When you plant a bare-root specimen the roots spread out in every direction in a natural fibrous network. This is in stark contrast to container grown roots which circle around themselves in an ever tightening fist. A plant grown in a pot has also had to deal with extreme fluctuations in temperature and irregular watering, while a plant grown in an open field has grown steadily and strongly.
The downside of bare-root plants is their appearance. When your plants arrive you are often left looking at little more than a handful of twigs. Bare-root plants need to be put in the ground as soon as possible. Once removed from the soil, the danger is that the roots dry out and die. Dig a hole large enough to accommodate the entire root system, and make sure that the roots are covered with at least half an inch of soil. If you are not able to plant out, then pot up your plants in an appropriate sized container and remember to keep the roots damp, but not waterlogged. Remember, when planting bare-root time is of the essence.
Depending on what you’re after, there are hundreds of nurseries online and catalogues which supply plants bare-root. Some nurseries specialise in trees or hedging; in Britain we are spoiled for choice when it comes to the number to nurseries which offer bare-root plants. Crocus has a good selection of roses, and Unwins has numerous perennials to choose from. If you want a few new fruit trees, Marshalls is a good place to start. Toby Buckland’s nursery also specialises in bare root plants. Looking to establish a new hedge? Then bare-root is definitely the way to go; have a look at Hedge Nursery to for inspiration. You have a world of bare-root options at your fingertips.
As for me, my bare-root roses have recently arrived. The handful of uninspired stems I now possess is far from exciting. However, buying bare-root is all about buying a plant’s potential. Gardeners, more than most, have a great capacity for optimism. We always think that next year the garden will be better than the last. The great thing about watching a garden mature is that we’re rarely wrong. My new roses are already in the ground, their roots growing and readying the plant for spring. I can’t wait to see them grow and bloom. In the meantime, I have another issue to deal with; I need to find a place for a singing reindeer.
When I decided to fund a TV commercial on Christmas Day, I didn’t realise it would lead to the start of a campaign to ask large businesses to change their approach to charitable giving and support small charities.
Here’s how that came about.
After I was diagnosed with acute myeloid leukaemia, which left me in need of a gruelling stem cell transplant, I spent the best part of 2014 in hospital. While there I benefitted from the amazing work that charities do, so when I left hospital I wanted to give something back.
I not only wanted to give the gift of funding but of awareness. I settled on a Christmas Day TV advert to highlight the work of a specific charity, as well as advertising on product packs. But when I approached some of the UK’s leading charities, I was shocked to be made to feel as if I had to prove myself and my brand to earn their approbation. Sadly I was too small for them, and they were too big to care.
The experience made me look beyond these big, well-known charities to the smaller ones doing extraordinary work on a shoestring. They are overlooked when it comes to big corporate giving but their work is just as important, if not more so. I vowed then and there to do something to help.
I have written and directed a two-minute TV commercial (with no mention of the products I sell) and have secured a prime time spot on Channel 4 on Christmas Day, timed to air just after the Queen’s Christmas broadcast. This is the advert I wantto use to shine a light on these small-time heroes.
I approached a small, Tetbury-based national charity called Hope For Tomorrow, which works tirelessly to provide mobile chemotherapy units to local NHS Trusts so patients don’t have to travel for hours for treatment. The charity leapt at the chance to work with me because such opportunities to raise awareness of their work don’t come their way often, and I was thrilled to be involved with such a great cause.
But I was shocked by the huge gap between big and small organisations in the charity sector. The larger charities get the lion’s share of corporate giving, leaving the smaller ones scrabbling for scraps.
This is a flaw in the charity sector, and much of the problem comes from an unbalanced relationship with business. Large organisations mainly work with large charities that already have a global level of awareness. It’s almost as though businesses are glory hunting when it comes to charity partnerships, to the detriment of smaller charities.
I have launched a campaign calling for large corporations to support small charities and shout about the ones they are already supporting. So whatever your cause, please sign my pledge and help to make a change this Christmas.
I have also dedicated a page on my Black Farmer website to help businesses and small charities find each other. As businesses, it’s important to show that we care for bigger things than just the products we sell.
Talk to us on Twitter via @Gdnvoluntary and join our community for your free Guardian Voluntary Sector monthly newsletter, with analysis and opinion sent direct to you on the first Thursday of the month.
Three months after Mum died, it was really important that we observe her Christmas traditions. As part of a non-Christian, immigrant family, I found Christmas tense as a child. You built up a set of cards from classmates that went unreciprocated; your parents grumbled at having to buy gifts for teachers paid to educate us; presents were a waste of money. And Diwali was always referred to as “Indian Christmas”.
But we had our traditions, and Mum made us observe them. From my uncle staying over then driving to his house to shower (and us waiting for him in order for the festivities to start) to my best friend, Junaid, coming over for the meal and games, and phoning my ba (grandmother) and bapuji (grandfather) to say to them in a problematic Indian accent: “Merry Christmas.” The best, though, was Mum’s roast tandoori Christmas chicken. She made it once a year, and it was, without fail, delicious.
On our wedding day my wife and I were presented with a book of recipes crowdsourced from our families. Pride of place was the recipe for Mum’s roast tandoori Christmas chicken, written in her handwriting. It’s the item I’d run back into a burning house to rescue. There’s something powerful about seeing her handwriting.
The year she died, I took the recipe back to our childhood home so we could prepare for Christmas. My sister, wife and I were going to make the roast tandoori Christmas chicken, and in that first taste my sister and I would be transported back to Mum’s kitchen, with the sound of sizzling onions and popping mustard seeds, the smell of garlic and garam masala and ginger and coriander, and the familiar sight of Mum, standing with one flip-flopped foot resting on a bench, cutting potatoes into the palm of her hand with the blunt, serrated, black-handled knife she used to cut everything from onions and chicken to garlic and fruit. This would be our time machine. If the kitchen looked and sounded like the kitchen I grew up in, it would be like she was there with us.
The recipe listed the things we needed for the marinade: yoghurt, ginger and garlic; tomato puree, chilli powder, turmeric, cumin and coriander powder; garam masala, fresh coriander – finely chopped – two serving spoons of oil.
We didn’t have any tomato puree. Only four cherry tomatoes. My wife suggested we chop them up finely and add them in with sugar. I said no. We had to do this properly. After 15 minutes of argument, my sister called a truce by placing Mum’s metal marinating bowl in front of us. “Now what?” she asked. “There’s no measurements to go on.”
I said: “We start with two serving spoons of oil.”
“That’s too much,” said my wife.
“We stick to the recipe,” I said firmly, pouring the oil over the chicken. My sister looked at the tray and poured in more oil. I glared at her. “It wasn’t enough,” she said. I added a pinch of all the spices and stirred.
“There’s no salt in the recipe.”
“Mum put salt in everything,” I told my wife. “We should put salt in.”
“I thought you wanted to follow the recipe exactly,” my wife said, flashing me a sarcastic smile. “We shouldn’t put salt in if it doesn’t say salt,” my sister agreed.
We cut the chicken into pieces and rubbed the marinade over them, placing the trays in the fridge. It didn’t feel right, I thought. There was too much oil. It was going to ruin the whole thing. That night I couldn’t sleep, haunted by the excess of sunflower oil. I crept downstairs and as quietly as I could, pulled the trays of marinated chicken out of the fridge. The yoghurty marinade had separated from the extra unwarranted dollop of sunflower oil and there was a thick, greasy film swimming around the chicken. I poured the excess oil out, trying to stop the marinade disappearing with it.
Hours later, my sister and I sampled a piece before it was served. “Smells about right,” I said. She nodded. “Every year Mum asked me if I wanted to learn how to make this,” she said. “I don’t know why I always said no.”
“Mum’s chicken smelled stronger than this, more chickeny.”
I lifted the chicken to my mouth and put it in. There was a cacophony of tastes, the lilt of the lemon, ginger and garlic working like a tightly knit kabaddi team, the piquant persistence of the chilli powder, the warm gloop of yoghurt and the singe of cumin all dancing in my mouth – like a parade of elephants surrounded by bhangra dancers hoisting their arms in the air, with trumpets blaring and dhols banging. I rolled my head back in hypnotised, dizzying jubilation and … it didn’t taste anything like my mum’s Christmas roast tandoori chicken. It tasted like an imitation.
I swallowed the chicken and looked at my sister.
“It needs more salt,” she said. And I agreed.
Fill the grid so that every row, every column and every 3x3 box contains the numbers 1 to 9.
For a helping hand call our solutions line on 0906 200 83 83. Calls cost £1.03 per minute from a BT landline. Calls from other networks may vary and mobiles will be considerably higher. Service supplied by ATS. Call 0330 333 6946 for customer service (charged at standard rate).
Buy the next issue of the Guardian or subscribe to our Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.
Letters: If we want to make sure our most vulnerable people are not forgotten, we must bring some longevity to our charity
Fill the grid so that each run of squares adds up to the total in the box above or to the left. Use only numbers 1-9, and never use a number more than once per run (a number may reoccur in the same row, in a separate run).
Buy the Guardian next Friday or subscribe to our Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.
Brief letters: Blair’s manners with Murdoch | How to survive liberal-elite families | Reasons for Hope | Malt extract
Franca Sozzani, the editor-in-chief of Italian Vogue, has died after a year-long illness. While she might not have been a global household name like her US counterpart and friend Anna Wintour, she was undoubtedly a giant of Italian fashion. The industry has responded accordingly. In a tribute published on the American Vogue website, Wintour describes her as “the hardest-working person I have known, and with an envy-inducing ease with multitasking”. A post on Marc Jacobs’ Instagram reads: “Her incredible contribution to fashion will be missed.”
At the helm of the Italy’s most prominent fashion magazine for 28 years, Sozzani became known for working with photographers including Bruce Weber, Paolo Roversi and Steven Meisel on a magazine that was known for cutting-edge, talking-point visuals that often provoked debate. Sozzani produced an all-black issue in 2008, with only black models featured. It was reprinted three times. A plus-size issue followed three years later. She was the first to embrace the rise of reality TV stars, putting Kim Kardashian on the cover of L’Uomo Vogue (which she also edited) in 2012, two years before American Vogue did the same.
Sometimes Sozzani’s work was more controversial when the commercial nature of fashion jarred with issues of body image and gender politics. One shoot, in 2005, was based on women having plastic surgery; another, in 2014, prompted by the rise of domestic violence in Italy, featured girls running from knife-wielding men. “Fashion isn’t really about clothes,” she said. “It’s about life.” Sozzani saw anything that was part of the cultural conversation as fair game for a fashion shoot. She wanted to join that conversation.
Her work shouted loudly, but Sozzani herself was a quieter presence on the fashion circuit, familiar to those in the know for her long-blond hair, uniform of 50s-style flared skirts, white shirts, diamond teardrop earrings and beatific smile. This continued until very recently. Despite being on oxygen, she appeared at the fashion awards in London earlier this month, to accept her award for positive change. Her final Instagram is a post of her, Wintour and Karl Lagerfeld at the Chanel show in Paris the same week.
The Sozzani family is a dynasty at the heart of Italian fashion. Her sister Carla founded the concept store Corso Como, and her son, Francesco Carrozzini, is a video director who worked with Lana Del Rey and Beyoncé. His last film, Franca: Chaos and Creation, a documentary six years in the making, was a portrait of his mother. It will be released in early 2017.
Sozzani was made for fashion, arguably, due to her ability to continually reflect the moment. “It’s not that I don’t think of the past, but it’s a waste of time,” she told the Observer at the end of November. “If you’re stuck in the past, beholden to it, then your creativity is stuck there, too, because you don’t give yourself a chance to evolve.”
I still have a fair bit of respect and admiration for Tony Blair, but even if I didn’t I would have been mightily impressed by his response to Rupert Murdoch’s demand that the then PM intervene on his behalf with the European commission (Report, 21 December). Apparently Mr Blair “offered to reflect on how best to approach the commission”. Surely the most subtle and inoffensive “fuck off” in history?
Steve Pound MP
Labour, Ealing North
• After Stuart Heritage’s hints on how the liberal-elite family should deal with a potentially uncomfortable Christmas gathering alongside Brexiteers (G2, 22 December), I trust you will, in your tradition of fair play, now offer corresponding advice on how we who voted Brexit (and yes, buy the Guardian) should respond to our liberal-elite family members.
Murray Hedgcock
London
• Hours after Nigel Farage labelled the organisation “extremist” (Report, 21 December), 50 members and friends of Hope not Hate in Nottingham are preparing a free Christmas meal for 150 people from the city who cannot afford one for themselves. If this is extremism, count me in.
Rob Watling
Radcliffe on Trent, Nottinghamshire
• Malt extract is readily available (Letters, 17 December). My husband uses it frequently as an ingredient, in bread making. I too consumed it as a child, by the spoonful and it was delicious.
Patricia Harrison
Oldham
• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters
How clean is your sleeping? And, no, this has nothing to do with changing the sheets more often. Actor and queen of dubious wellness fads Gwyneth Paltrow is now seeking to do for the previously straightforward and cost-free business of going to sleep what annoying green-juice gurus have done for eating: turn it into yet another manic form of self-improvement.
“Clean sleeping”, according to a new book from her lifestyle website Goop, turns out to be remarkably like the boring old sleeping you’ve been doing all your life, only more time-consuming and expensive.
First, download and learn some special yoga techniques. Then massage your feet for three minutes every night with special cream. And, finally, why not splash out £50 on a special pillowcase “infused with fine strands of copper oxide”, which supposedly reduces wrinkles through the power of – and I’m paraphrasing a lot here – metal ions and witchcraft?
Because sleep, according to Gwynnie, who claims at least seven or eight hours of it a night, is going to be 2017’s “biggest health trend”. Heaven only knows how the increasingly preposterous clean movement is going to top this. Clean breathing, maybe, using special fresh air bottled and sold at £70 a pop? Or are they finally clean out of ideas?
Don’t get me wrong; I’m as tempted as anyone, right now, just to shut out the big bad world and contemplate my navel for a while. Why not forget about the scary things nobody can change, and concentrate on those you can, such as losing half a stone and making a New Year resolution to be more patient with the kids?
Who knows, perhaps everything else will just magically fall into place if we can all become marginally better, thinner and more organised, if slightly self-obsessed, people. Just plug into your mindfulness app, strip away the horrid toxins polluting your clean life or – if that all sounds too hard – simply curl up with one of the umpteen books churned out this year on how to do hygge, the Danish art of cosiness.
But the truth is that most Brits are making a reasonably passable go of life as individuals. It’s as a collective – a people who used to rub along well enough, but seem increasingly incapable of tolerance, empathy or letting go of our cherished individual grievances – that we’re failing. Louise Casey’s review said migrants needed to integrate better into British society. In fact, it’s all of us.
Sixteen years ago, sociologist Robert D Putnam published Bowling Alone, which identified a growing threat to democracy from what he called declining “social capital”, or a reduction in humans doing ordinary everyday things together – such as joining a bowling league or volunteering for the parent-teacher association.
The idea that doing small things in collaboration with others encourages people to participate more actively in society as a whole – perhaps by turning out to vote or paying taxes to support public services – was fashionable in Labour circles in the past decade and lived on under David Cameron in the guise of the policy he initially hoped would define him, the ultimately doomed big society.
Togetherness and social cohesiveness is also an underlying theme of hygge, although you wouldn’t know it from the saccharine British magazine interpretations, generally involving images of a lone woman blissfully drinking hot chocolate in cashmere socks. (As an exasperated Danish friend pointed out, the whole point is that you’re not meant to get hyggelig on your own. It’s about togetherness, friendship and quite often communal singing – not expensively accessorised me-time – as such, it’s hard to disentangle from communitarian Scandinavian attitudes more generally.)
But whatever it does or doesn’t do for democracy, evidence suggests that looking outwards rather than inwards – strengthening your ties to others, finding ways to be part of something bigger – does at least make people happier than obsessing on themselves. If there’s a basic human skill we need to improve and practise, it’s not eating or sleeping, but the rusty art of togetherness.
Sitting dutifully through the school carol service in the village church last week, I felt myself getting emotional in a way that can’t entirely be explained by the sight of tinsel-haloed small people squawking Away In a Manger. There was something unexpectedly moving about the sound of voices coming together at the end of a harsh, divisive year.
Joining a choir has been said to help sufferers of depression and anxiety, and it’s not hard to see why singing together could unlock emotions that doing it alone in the shower does not. There is something powerful about the synchronicity of singing in time with others, the way each voice in a harmony relies on the rest. Choirs are now so popular that there are even versions specifically for hopelessly bad singers, who just want to join in.
Outlets for this fuzzy and half-articulated desire for togetherness are everywhere. It’s there in the renewed popularity of live events, from festivals to lecture tours, and in the unstoppable rise of social media. It’s there on dancefloors, but also in the rise of grassroots movements such as Momentum – at least until zealots predictably began trying to divide and conquer – and it is also welling up in More United, the centrist grouping set up after Brexit to crowdfund for candidates standing or openness and tolerance.
A third of Britons feel motivated to do something vaguely political as a result of this year’s events, according to a More United poll this week and, while most wouldn’t join conventional parties, they do want to come together in some other way, even if they’re not yet clear how or why.
But togetherness was there in leavers voting in the EU referendum, too, finally finding a tribe with which they could identify and a way to feel they mattered. You don’t necessarily have to agree with the reasons people want to be together to accept that they do.
There’s nothing intrinsically wrong with resolving to be a better person, or with occasionally longing – as Voltaire’s Candide put it – just to cultivate your own garden for a bit, and stop worrying about other people’s. But don’t kid yourself about what it actually achieves. As an idea, “better together” has been rather tarnished by political association. Still, it’s true all the same.
By the time you read this, we’ll have endured 54 days of full-on festive hype since the Christmas promotions kicked off the day after Halloween. And I, for one, have had enough. If I have to hear – or write – about another claret or châteauneuf that’s perfect for the turkey, I’m going to give up the day job. So here, for fellow grumps and Scrooges, is an alternative Xmas (or alt-xmas, as I suppose we must now call it) drinking plan.
For those who do not want to hear that you need to leave a glass of sherry out for Santa, try madeira or marsala for a change. Waitrose has the delicious, slightly orangey Curatolo Marsala Superiore Dolce (18% abv) for just £11.29. You could use whatever Santa and Rudolph don’t drink to make zabaglione before dry January sets in.
Similarly, refuse to drink French wine with your Christmas dinner, and instead go for a lush South American red. I asked my local wine shop in Bristol, Davis Bell McCraith, to recommend an alternative to claret and they came up with a cracking Argentinian malbec/cabernet blend called Amancaya (£15.99 DBM, £14.50 Fareham Wine Cellar, £17.50 Oxford Wine Company; 14.5% abv), a joint collaboration between Lafite Rothschild and Nicolas Catena. After all, it’s much more fun chatting to the staff in a local indie on Christmas Eve than battling the supermarket queues.
Starting with smoked salmon? Drink sauvignon blanc rather than champagne. Or a fragrant malt whisky such as the delicate, sweet, heathery Mackmyra Brukswhisky Swedish Whisky (£42 Oddbins; 41.4% abv), which is one of the most delicious drams I’ve tasted this year.
And with the stilton? Please not port again: go and track down a bottle of sloe gin, which in my book is the best present bar none to take to friends or family you’re staying with. Tesco’s Finest Sloe Gin (29% abv) is not half bad at £14 for a full-size bottle, and you can always resolve to make your own in 2017. Alternatively, buy a full-size bottle of the dark, rich, sweet Port Barrel-Aged Greenwich Ale (6% abv) that Meantime has made for Marks & Spencer this year: great value at £5.50.
Finally, your friends will love you if you bring along the ingredients for knocking up a few cocktails. The best bargain of all is an orange liqueur called L’Esprit d’Orange (22% abv), which is a ridiculously cheap £4.99 at Lidl and which you could also add to caramelised oranges, a sorbet or a batch of marmalade; I even add a dash to my mulled wine. Happy Christmas – and thank goodness it’s nearly over.
• Fiona Beckett’s new ebook, 101 Ways To Enjoy Cheese And Wine, is out now at £4.50.
Wall Street has rediscovered its appetite for Weight Watchers shares after the company’s most famous customer and investor, Oprah Winfrey, revealed the results of her new diet.
Shares in Weight Watchers jumped by almost a fifth on Thursday following the news that the broadcasting titan had lost 18kg (40lb) by following the company’s latest guidance.
A new advertising campaign showed Winfrey urging viewers to “take the leap”, as she clinked wine glasses with friends over spaghetti and salad.
“Since I started Weight Watchers, I’ve lost over 40lb. I can honestly tell you I struggle no more,” declared Winfrey, who bought 10% of the company in October 2015. “I’ve eaten everything I love, tacos, pasta. I’ve never felt deprived.”
In a second advert, Winfrey insists people can lose weight without giving up the foods they love. “Weight Watchers is easier than any other programme I’ve ever been on,” she says.
Investors lapped up the message and sent Weight Watchers shares soaring by 18% to $12.35, their biggest move in 10 months.
The ads are due to air on US television and social media from 26 December, a time when potential customers will be looking to burn off their Christmas calories.
Weight Watchers has suffered in recent years as consumers have moved away from diet programmes, in favour of healthier eating, calorie-counting apps and activity trackers such as FitBit.
Shares hit a one-year low of below $10 in September after the chief executive, James Chambers, resigned. They soared to $26 after Winfrey bought her stake in the firm 14 months ago.
Supermarkets are braced for their busiest day of the year on Friday, with shoppers expected to spend nearly £900m on groceries for the Christmas break.
Tesco, the UK’s biggest supermarket, is expecting 10 million shoppers and to sell one-third of its Christmas turkeys, as 200,000 customers buy their birds and turkey crowns in one day. Sainsbury’s said its busiest shopping period would start at about 12pm.
Although many people make last-minute purchases on Christmas Eve, traditionally the number of shoppers out and about the day before Christmas is one-fifth lower than on 23 December.
But with Christmas Day falling on a Sunday, potentially leaving time for a full day of shopping on Christmas Eve, retailers are expecting to be busy.
The number of shoppers visiting the UK’s high streets and shopping centres was down 7.7% last week, according to shopper tracking company Springboard, and retailers are holding their breath for a final dash to stores.
Waitrose, which announced a 1.7% drop in sales last week on the same period last year, said many shoppers were holding off to make their big purchases later. It expects takings to be three-and-a-half times higher than on a normal Friday.
Grocers that focus on premium quality foods usually grab a bigger share of the market at Christmas. Marks & Spencer, which typically accounts for 3% of UK grocery spend, sells one-quarter of all festive turkeys.
In the past few years, discounters Aldi and Lidl have taken a bigger slice of the Christmas pie by tempting shoppers with luxury foods such as lobster and champagne at bargain prices.
This year, the major supermarkets have fought back, with Asda offering seasonal packs of vegetables such as carrots and potatoes for 20p, and Lidl slashing its price to 19p to undercut Tesco’s 39p packs, which were a hit last year.
Meanwhile, Iceland, which has struggled in recent years, has been seeing strong growth. Malcolm Walker, the chief executive of the supermarket, said: “We are on a roll, with everything going well.” He said Friday is expected to be the chain’s best Christmas sales day since its launch more than 40 years ago.
Meanwhile, the rise of next day delivery and click and collect is also encouraging shoppers to leave things later than in previous years.
Online retailers are offering some of their latest order dates in history. Fashion website Asos says shoppers who order before 8pm on Friday will get their gifts ahead of Christmas Day and Debenhams is promising click and collect next day delivery to stores for orders made before 9pm on Friday.
M&S and Next shoppers must order by Thursday night in order to get their gifts on time, although the latter is promising shoppers a refund and gift card if it does not meet its delivery promise.
Which museum will be the next to appoint a female director? Most of the world’s great visual arts institutions remain firmly under male control. The current bosses of the British Museum and the National Gallery in London are men, as are the directors of the Prado in Madrid, the Louvre in Paris and the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York. So which groundbreaking top-rank art museum will be run by a woman from 1 January 2017?
It is one of the oldest and grandest of them all, and you will find it at the heart of perhaps the most male-dominated enclave in Europe. The new director of the Vatican Museums, whose collections started to be amassed in the Renaissance, is the Italian art historian Barbara Jatta, who previously curated prints there and rose to be deputy director. She has now been appointed by Pope Francis to succeed the current 77-year-old director, Antonio Paolucci, in the new year.
This is not as surprising as it seems. The Vatican may be one of Europe’s last surviving medieval city states, run by cardinals and policed by Swiss guards with halberds (at least that’s how tourists are likely to see them – they have guns and tanks too), but its incredible complex of museums has a history of unexpected modernity. What other religious institution collects atheist art? The modern gallery of the Vatican Museums proudly displays a grotesque painting of a suffering pope by the defiantly godless painter Francis Bacon. That’s probably the most provocative presence in a sensitive and imaginative collection of modern religious art that also includes Van Gogh’s Pietà (after Delacroix) and paintings by Dalí and Picasso.
The Vatican’s museum is so vast and diverse that it is a plural. It is called the Vatican Museums and consists of a connected sprawl of collections that fill a large part of the Vatican itself. Queues often stretch right along the outside of the papal palace complex. Once you get inside, the cornucopia of art includes the Pinacoteca, where such paintings as Leonardo da Vinci’s St Jerome and Caravaggio’s The Entombment of Christ hang; numerous archaeological collections that have everything from giant bowls from Nero’s palace to an extraordinary Egyptian art installation from Hadrian’s villa; and a fine museum of global art.
At the heart of it all is the Belvedere courtyard, one of the oldest extant art galleries on earth. Here stand some of the most renowned masterpieces of classical sculpture including the Apollo Belvedere and the Laocoon. For centuries, this was the most hallowed destination of the Grand Tour. Young aristocrats from all over Europe came to see the Apollo Belvedere, considered in the 18th century to be the most beautiful statue ever made. After paying antiquity its due reverence they made their way, as the crowds still do today, towards the climax of the Vatican Museums – through the rooms of Raphael to emerge into the glory of the Sistine chapel.
It is great that such a majestic and venerable museum has Jatta as its new director. But what should she do to modernise it further? Can such a marvellous collection be improved? In recent years, the big issue for this museum has been to deal with its colossal crowds in spaces that were originally designed for cardinals and popes to spaciously hang out in. Measures have had to be taken to preserve the Sistine frescoes, at risk from the sheer number of people passing through. Jatta will no doubt have to wrestle with these problems just as Paolucci has.
Yet I have a suggestion that, as well as enriching this great complex of museums, might also alleviate overcrowding, simply by providing more spaces to explore. It seems incredible that with so much art and architecture on display the Vatican still has hidden treasures – but it does. Hidden behind closed doors tantalisingly near the museum are Michelangelo’s paintings in the Capella Paolina and Raphael’s Loggia, his greatest work, whose opening might help us understand much better why he is one of the greatest of all artists. In the 21st century it seems archaically exclusive to keep these glories for the eyes of the Vatican elite only. The same progressive spirit that has given the Vatican Museums a female director ahead of comparable art collections must now democratise public access and open up this clerical city’s hidden spaces. That would be a great cultural demonstration of the Vatican’s readiness to change.
The Queen and Prince Philip have flown to their Sandringham estate in Norfolk by helicopter after their initial Christmas plans to travel by train were cancelled because of ill health.
Sky News broadcast live footage showing the helicopter on its way to Norfolk. It landed safely at Sandringham 40 minutes later.
A spokesman would only confirm that the couple had left Buckingham Palace. A spokeswoman declined to comment further when asked about the health of the Queen and the duke.
Earlier, a spokeswoman confirmed that the Queen’s Christmas message would be broadcast as usual at 3pm on Christmas Day. “It is recorded some time in advance,” the spokeswoman said.
The couple had been expected to travel from London to King’s Lynn by train on Wednesday and then on to Sandringham.
But in a statement on Wednesday, Buckingham Palace said: “The Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh have heavy colds, and so have decided not to travel to Sandringham today.”
On Tuesday, it was announced that the Queen would be stepping down as patron from 25 national organisations at the end of her 90th birthday year, with the patronages passing to other members of the royal family.
The monarch and the 95-year-old duke hosted their annual Christmas lunch for dozens of relatives at Buckingham Palace on Tuesday.
The Prince of Wales did not mention the health of his parents in his Thought for the Day message, which was broadcast on BBC Radio 4 on Thursday morning. He recorded his remarks about the rise of populist extremism on Monday.
Bah humbug to traditional Christmas movies. At the tail end of December, the last thing you want as small-screen respite from the festivities is another heart-warming story of a magical Christmas. Or anything involving baubles. Here is a selection of films handily airing on TV over the holiday season to help you through this most magical time of the year.
Everyone gets sick of Christmas sometimes. At some point during the festive season, the onslaught of lights and food and sincerity will pile up into an enormous drift and suffocate you alive. But there is an antidote to all this cloying sweetness. That antidote is Jaws.
Forget about human kindness. Jaws reminds us that goodwill to all men only stretches as far as the beach, and after that you’re on your own. The sea is dark and deep, and crawling with leviathans that exist exclusively to murder you, legs first. The world is a scary place, and you had better be ready with your strychnine harpoons and exploding scuba tanks, or else it will take you out. If you look really hard, you will find flashes of Christmas spirit – the scene with Brody and his son at dinner is practically Christmas incarnate – but that’s all window dressing for a story about a shark that would kill you in a second if you let it.
Now that all blockbusters are legally mandated to culminate in scenes in which men with inflatable muscles save a large metropolitan area from a giant space-laser, Jaws is refreshingly simple. There’s a shark. It eats people. Some people go out to kill it. They do. The end. Stripped-down and taut, it is the perfect palate cleanser. In fact, the only thing that could make a Christmas Jaws broadcast any better is if everyone who watched it received a free Mayor Larry Vaughn anchor suit.
In my house, Christmas movies come in two flavours: 80s comedies and period dramas, and The Remains of the Day is the finest modern-day example of the latter. (Ghostbusters is obviously the finest example of the former category, but that’s another issue.) The richest and most moving film from the Merchant Ivory stable, perfectly adapted from Kazuo Ishiguro’s novel, this is the film I want to curl up with on a dark, melancholy winter’s afternoon; its mood matches the darkness outside, but the brilliance of the storytelling and acting thrills me into most unwinterly optimism.
So if you’re the kind of person who bangs on about the Emma Thompson scene in Love, Actually, please – please – watch this instead to see Thompson at her heartbroken best. (Seriously, don’t watch Love, Actually. It is genuinely one of the worst movies ever made.) It’s bittersweet to watch Christopher Reeves now, vibrant and healthy, but how cheering to see him be so good in the kind of dramatic role he so rarely got to play. I can’t watch James Fox enough in this, especially when he, as the foolish Lord Darlington, realises his mistake too late. But this is, of course, really Anthony Hopkins’s movie: he has never been better than he is here as Stevens the butler, Hannibal Schmannibal.
The Remains of the Day is about Britain during the second world war, but it is also about love and missed chances. So Nazi uniforms and longing looks, all in one of the finest British movies made. This is what holiday movie perfection looks like, folks.
When citing the best Charles Dickens film adaptation, some opt for David Lean’s Great Expectations, others for 1951’s Christmas Carol. But I’m sticking with Oliver!, Carol Reed’s boisterous presentation of the Lionel Bart musical, which has been synonymous with Dickens ever since I first watched it as a kid and assumed he must have written all the songs as well. Then, as now, I accept it as an accurate representation of an 1830s London where constables and cutpurses temporarily set aside their differences in order to congregate for a knees-up beside some tavern or other.
In fact, the last time I visited, the film looked just as good as it ever did. I love Oliver! for its rollicking gait and insouciant air and for the robust playing from Ron Moody (as Fagin), Jack Wild (Dodger) and Oliver Reed (a brooding, beautiful Bill Sikes, right before the rot set in). I suspect it might even be a more appropriate seasonal film than A Christmas Carol, in that its world of surging crowds, violent avarice and random kindness speaks more to the reality of Christmas than some pious tale of a miser who winds up buying a turkey.
And maybe the musical is the perfect vessel for Oliver Twist. This takes what might otherwise be seen as the novel’s weak points (the pantomime villainy; the cloying sentimentality; the facile, bouncing-ball plot) and makes a bonus of them. Amplified to a theatrical pitch, the tale casts off its social-realist clogs and begins dancing around the stage-flats like some festive carouser; merry one moment, maudlin the next.
I’ve reviewed the situation; arrived right back where I started. Oliver! (big as life and twice as noisy) remains the perfect Christmas Dickens.
’Tis the season for shameless repackaging and gleeful repetition. So what more fitting late-night, eggnogged-out cheerer-upper than this deliriously silly, but also remarkably smart, comedy sequel? It, too, delights in ostentatious tradition for its own sake; knowing yet affectionate cribbing from the recent past. The plot is exactly the same as the original, 2012’s 21 Jump Street, a belated big-screen transfer for the 80s TV show, this time round starring Channing Tatum and Jonah Hill.
The undercover cops must infiltrate a place of education (first time round, a high-school; this time, a college) to try to identify the dealer trading in a new drug popular with the students. They must battle youngsters suspicious of their crows’ feet, a tough-talking boss (Ice Cube), and their conflicted feelings about each other. What 22 Jump Street manages, however, is to be a yet-crisper facsimile of the original’s script, its set pieces funnier, its jokes more creative, and its two stars now ebulliently confident of their own skills, and of our love.
But the chief reason it feels fitting for the time of year at which your sense of benevolence might be under strain is that it’s just so damn nice. Rarely has a multiplex bro-romp proved that comedy doesn’t need to be cruel more effectively than this film. It advocates kindness and consideration above all else, in every relationship. It continually wrongfoots the audience with an admirable and very funny gay rights thread, which sees chief jock Tatum rebuking bullies, and himself, for their homophobic language. And its standout gag is a malapropism involving Cate Blanchett. Fun for all the family, almost.
Most Hollywood animations, even the best of them, are put together by teams of laser-eyed professionals who know what works and don’t want to reinvent the wheel. The adorable lead character goes on a journey with songs in the company of quirky animal friends who do quickfire gags. That’s it.
Jerry Seinfeld’s Bee Movie isn’t like that: it feels almost organic, natural, a hand-crafted comedy that follows the meandering, freewheeling train-of-thought typical of this observational comic. In Bee Movie, as in Seinfeld’s TV show, there is no hugging, no learning. Well: a minimum anyway. Seinfeld voices Barry, an idealistic young Everybee who falls in love with a human florist (voiced by Renée Zellweger) but then realises that he and his comrades are being systematically exploited for their delicious honey by their human oppressors.
The romantic storyline is supplanted by a hilarious, but weirdly inspiring courtroom saga in which Barry takes on the big human battalions and people such as Sting, who is guilty of cultural appropriation with his contemptible “prance-about stage name”. It is a comedy that starts funny, is funny in the middle, and ends up funny, unlike the usual Hollywood model in which the movie is frontloaded with humour – the laughs are only in the premise, the opening act, before it winds down into sentimentality. Bee Movie is a rare treat and one of Seinfeld’s unsung achievements.
Christmas holiday? Work is a holiday compared with Christmas. Which is why my kind of film at this time of year is one that a) requires minimal brainpower, b) makes me laugh, c) I haven’t seen for a while, and d) has nothing to do with Christmas. The Naked Gun ticks those boxes. Most people remember Zucker-Abrahams-Zucker’s earlier hits, Airplane! and Top Secret! The Naked Gun is more of the same: a spoof of the hard-boiled detective thriller packed with nonsense dialogue, corny puns, movie parodies and inspired slapstick, all carried by the zen master of deadpan, Leslie Nielsen.
I still find it difficult to keep a straight face thinking of, say, Nielsen’s “casing the joint” outing, which ends with him inadvertently destroying Ricardo Montalbán’s office, fellating a gargoyle, then threatening a woman with a stone dildo. Or his mangling of the national anthem while posing as an opera singer at the baseball match. It’s all funnier because it’s him doing it.
There’s an added nostalgia element seeing The Naked Gun now. It was a time when Weird Al Yankovic could be a celebrity cameo, when the US’s enemies included Idi Amin, Ayatollah Khomeini and, er,, er, Mikhail Gorbachev, and when OJ Simpson was a lovable former sporting hero (in a karmic running gag, he is accidentally clobbered every time he appears).
Yes, The Naked Gun is dated, occasionally dodgy, and very silly, but the carpet-bombing of comedy will satisfy the sternest of critics, the shortest of attention spans and the weariest of festive souls. At this time of year, I’m all three.
There are only three main performers in Dirty Rotten Scoundrels: Michael Caine as a debonair conman living high on the hog in the Côte D’Azur; Steve Martin as the uncouth pretender who becomes Caine’s own Eliza Doolittle; and Glenne Headly as the out-of-towner whom the tricksters compete to swindle. But the list of aliases distributed among the cast (including Dr Emil Shaffhausen, Lady Fanny of Omaha, Chips O’Toole and Ruprecht the Monkey Boy) suggests a far larger ensemble.
This 1988 romp is a celebration of performance and play-acting, of putting on daft voices and spinning tall tales. The scoundrels have transformed their lives into playgrounds where they do nothing but lark around in pursuit of money. For once, women get to play too: Headly is a hoot, and watch out also for Barbara Harris, from Nashville and Family Plot, as a credulous holidaymaker with more riches than sense.
Frank Oz directs briskly on sets and locations that would make a department store lighting section look murky. This may not be great cinema, but it is great comedy, with no end of delirious set-pieces, from Martin trying and failing repeatedly to remember Caine’s name while stuck in prison, to the torture Caine puts him through during one ruse when he is feigning paralysis. Such casual venality may not sound so funny when the world is staring down the barrel of the next US administration. The film is a good way, though, to forget for a few hours about any real-life dirty rotten scoundrels out there.
There is a special category of films that don’t get much acclaim: The Ones You Always Watch When They’re On. You know: you turn on the TV, tired and/or bored, can’t be doing with anything that takes effort. There’s this thing, it’s on, you think about flipping channel but for some reason, you keep going, and going, and going …
The king of TOYAWWTO used to be Bond, or the Carry Ons – but who, seriously, can be doing with them nowadays? For me, the archetypal TOYAWWTO is Starship Troopers: I must have seen it 50 times. Close second: The Matrix. But neither of them is on over Christmas as far as I can see, so it’s down to No 3 on the list: The Terminator.
More than 30 years on, The Terminator looks distinctly odd in parts: Linda Hamilton’s fuzz-brush haircut for one, the slavering worship of naked Arnie for another. It’s also strange to dwell on James Cameron’s idea of an early 80s nightclub for punks and hipsters, as well as his not-far-beneath-the-surface homicidal hatred of those selfsame punks and hipsters. But The Terminator remains as fantastically watchable as ever, in the purest sense of the word: it’s like gobbling down a whole tube of glucose tablets in one go, without the long-term medical consequences.
When you are punchdrunk from festivity, Christmas is a great time for TOYAWWTO. (It’s not just about action or sci-fi; Room with a View, for me, is a big one, and I don’t think it’s possible to watch End of the Century, the Ramones doc, too many times.) The only downside that I can see is that The Terminator doesn’t seem to have been double-billed with Terminator 2. So perhaps all our Christmases haven’t come at once.
Rose Evansky, who has died aged 94, was from the early 1950s to the mid-60s the only woman with a major salon in Mayfair, London, and was a pioneer in the use of the hand-held blow dryer. She regarded her work as a personal service, rather than a vehicle to promote herself. Evansky empathised with her customers, since she knew just how much grooming cost in time and money, especially for women whose hair had natural kinks or curls resistant to smoothing – and she hated the process of straightening hair.
In 1962 she noticed through the window of a nearby barber’s shop that its proprietor was using a powerful new hand-held dryer, in conjunction with a brush, to smooth a man’s hair. Men had never been subjected to the torment of sitting for an hour or more with hair doused in chemicals and yanked on rollers, under a fixed hood of hot air.
Soon afterwards, Evansky was seen trying the technique in her salon, on a Mrs Hay, by the rule-breaking Vogue “Young Ideas” editor Clare Rendlesham, who immediately summoned up publicity for Evansky’s blow-wave – it worked on straight hair, too. Within a year, all Mayfair’s leading stylists offered it. Waving a dryer became part of the drama of their act.
Reaching Mayfair had been an achievement. Rose’s family fled antisemitism in Poland after the first world war to settle in Germany, but under Nazi rule Rose’s father, Max Lerner, was sent to Dachau in 1938. He was released the following year and left for Britain, where he was joined by his wife, his son, Heinie, and Rose. She was 16 and spoke only Yiddish and German when she boarded one of the last kindertransport trains to safety in the UK.
The family found a home in the East End of London, and Rose took an apprenticeship with Adolf Cohen of Whitechapel Road, the “professor” of the hairdressing trade (who also trained Vidal Sassoon). At 20, she married a fellow hairdresser, Albert Evansky. After the war, when “getting your hair done” had become a middle-class norm, the couple opened their first salon, in 1947 in the north London suburb of Hendon.
It was successful enough by 1953 to allow them to rent posher premises in North Audley Street, Mayfair. Their salon was sympathetic to workers as well as clients: Evansky accepted Leonard Lewin, later Leonard of Mayfair, as an apprentice, after the celebrated Freddie French had rejected him because of his rough background.
Evansky’s hand blow-drying displeased her husband, who complained: “Have you gone mad? We’ve just bought 20 new hood dryers. What shall we do with them? Throw them out?” (The salon kept a few for high-dressed, lacquered styles, and older clients.) The marital relationship was failing.
Evansky disliked the way fashionable hairdressing was becoming about flamboyant male stylists who wanted only young clients and often cut their hair without regard for their identity or feelings.
She had made friends through clients, among them the playwright and script-doctor Denis Cannan; after both had divorced their spouses, they married in 1965, and by the end of the decade Evansky had left hairdressing to live with him in the Sussex countryside.
They returned to London for a while, then retired to Hove, East Sussex. After she was noticed at the launch of a book by another 1960s hairdresser, and interviewed by radio and fashion press, she wrote a memoir, In Paris We Sang (2013).
Feminist groups in Lebanon have called for protests over the appointment of a man as the country’s first-ever women’s affairs minister.
The choice of Jean Ogasapian to run the ministry has sparked widespread disbelief and mockery over what many perceived as an insult to Lebanon’s active women’s rights movement.
Nasri Atallah, a Lebanese writer, described it as “the ultimate act of mansplaining”.
The Lebanese government convened this week for the first time since Saad Hariri was sworn in as prime minister. It capped two and a half years of a political vacuum during which the country had no president.
Amid the political jockeying for seats in the cabinet, which are divided by sectarian loyalties and allegiance to the country’s many warlords-turned-politicians rather than any measure of competence, Ogasapian’s appointment drew strong derision.
KAFA, a prominent women’s rights organisation, called for protests under the slogan, “No women, no legitimacy”.
“The government that has been announced is a clear indictment to all the politicians who took part in creating it,” the organisation said in a statement. “It is an insult to all women.”
Lebanon faces many challenges in advancing women’s rights in a nation that has a thin veneer of westernisation but remains deeply patriarchal. Domestic violence is pervasive in the country, and Lebanese women cannot pass on their citizenship to their children if they marry foreigners.
Only this month, the parliament began the process of repealing an article in the penal code that allowed the halting of a rape prosecution if the perpetrator married his victim.
Commentators on social media satirised the appointment of a man in the women’s affairs ministry – a state ministry that will probably have little power to advance women’s rights.
One common joke showed Rosie the Riveter, who symbolised American women working in shipyards in a second world war poster campaign, with Ogasapian’s face transposed over Rosie’s.
Rima Njeim, a popular radio host, joked that a male women’s affairs minister could extend maternity leave until a newborn starts school or make all women retake their driving licence tests.
Others pointed out that few of the other ministers were suited to their jobs. The tourism minister, for example, has a degree in physics; the minister of culture is a vascular surgeon; the agriculture minister is a lawyer; and the minister of public health holds a degree in engineering.
Lebanon’s new government, led by the son of the assassinated former prime minister Rafik Hariri, faces numerous problems, including decaying infrastructure and power cuts to recurring crises in rubbish collection, caring for a refugee population from Syria that numbers more than a million, and containing the fallout from the war in which Hezbollah, the most powerful military organisation in the country, is fighting for the regime of Bashar al-Assad.
Abortion today is an extremely safe, straightforward procedure, provided in a highly regulated environment. One in three women in the UK will have an abortion in her lifetime, funded by the NHS (except if she lives in Northern Ireland). This will usually take place within an NHS hospital or in a centre run by one of the independent charitable providers – the British Pregnancy Advisory Service (BPAS) or Marie Stopes International (MSI). But just because it is safe doesn’t mean corners can be cut, or providers can pick and mix from rules and regulations, as was unearthed in the course of the care quality commission’s investigation of MSI.
Some of the failings found at MSI have no implications for safety. The batch signing of abortion forms, for example, has no clinical significance – it is simply a legal requirement that all women have their abortion request legally authorised by two doctors. But the other problems uncovered – from clear deficits in clinical governance at the top level through to problems with safeguarding and consent, to the report of the appalling handling of a vulnerable patient – can leave us in no doubt that the CQC was not over-reacting when it requested MSI suspend its services over safety concerns earlier this year.
Clinical supervision and governance structures, training and upskilling staff and recruiting the right people to leadership positions takes time – and money. Adhering to legal requirements that have no clinical benefit may be irksome and expensive, but that’s life. If you operate in a highly regulated environment and believe women deserve high-quality care, these measures are not optional.
Abortion is an easy procedure when everything goes right – but you can’t run a clinical service on the assumption that everything runs to plan. The best doctors experience patients who develop complications, unexpected problems arise in the healthiest patients, clients need access to good counselling services and support. Research and innovation is essential to determine best practice. This costs – but it’s not just a matter of cost but of commitment, and focus on values.
The BPAS has been delivering not-for-profit services since the 1967 Abortion Act came into force, providing high-quality, compassionate care that the NHS either could not, or would not provide from its own facilities. It was founded by a former abortion law reformer who saw that the inability of the NHS to meet women’s needs would push them into paying extortionate sums for poor-quality care by private doctors.
In the 1970s, MSI joined BPAS as a charitable provider. Today some 200,000 women a year in the UK have an abortion. MSI provides about a third of all abortion care , BPAS a further third, and the remainder are performed in NHS premises.
In a parody of market economics, the two charities now compete with each other and with local NHS hospitals for regional contracts to provide NHS abortion services. With NHS funds shaved, the price commissioners will pay is driven down. In the current commissioning environment a cheaper service will trump a quality service almost every time.
We all deserve an honest and open discussion about how this essential women’s healthcare service is commissioned and provided in an environment of cost-cutting. On the brink of the 50th anniversary of the Abortion Act, BPAS is absolutely clear, abortion must be fully decriminalised and women finally trusted to make their own reproductive choices for themselves – and they must be able to exercise those choices in clinics providing safe, high-quality abortion care.
Subscribe to us on iTunes, Soundcloud, Mixcloud, Audioboom and Acast
The Token podcast is based on discussion and difference. We want to hear from people who both agree and disagree with us, or who simply have a different perspective. So please get in touch (and be respectful!) You can comment below, send us an email at podcasts@theguardian.com or tweet us at @leahgreentweets , @fredmcconnell and @guardianaudio
At a “thank you” rally in early December, Donald Trump promised that he would Make Christmas Great Again.
“We’re going to start saying ‘Merry Christmas’ again!” Trump told the crowd in Grand Rapids, Michigan.
“How about all those department stores?” he mused.
“They have the bells and they have the red walls and they have the snow. But they don’t have ‘Merry Christmas’.
“I think they’re going to start putting up ‘Merry Christmas’.”
Given this full-throated pledge, it might come as a surprise to learn that Trump Tower, the golden jewel in Trump’s property portfolio and the building where he is currently plotting his first term, has no signs saying “Merry Christmas” whatsoever.
Visiting the Trump Tower on Wednesday, it was clear that holiday decorations have not been eschewed altogether. In fact, it’s the opposite. The interior of the building is festooned with festive frippery.
There is a 30ft Christmas tree. There are four-foot wreaths all around the entrance area.
There are scores of golden boxes, tied up with ribbons, laid around the place, as if Santa Claus gave up on his way to the Trump residence and dumped the presents in the lobby.
There are life-sized nutcracker statues, some holding trumpets.
The only mention of Christmas the Guardian could find in Trump Tower was in the gift shop, where a little Christmas tree bauble, which showed Santa Claus lying down on top of a yellow taxi, was described as a “Christmas ornament”. The ornament had been made in China.
Trump has promised that he will return Merry Christmas to common parlance before – most notably in November 2015, when he was gearing up for the Republican primaries.
It makes sense. The idea of a war on Christmas – that Americans are being forced to say “happy holidays” instead of “merry Christmas” because of political correctness – is a popular theory among some conservatives.
But outside Trump Tower, at least, the reaction to “merry Christmas” making a comeback – if you accept that it ever left – was mixed.
“I don’t think people are maliciously trying to tamp down Christmas celebrations,” said Bradley Bennett, 37.
“I don’t spend any time thinking about whether someone wishes me happy holidays or merry Christmas. They’re just trying to wish me well and wish me a good day.”
Bennett was with his three-year-old son Philip, who described Trump as an “evil man”.
The president-elect’s yuletide pledge was better received by Faye Schimek, 74. She was in New York City from near Houston, Texas, to visit her grandson and granddaughter.
“They want to be too politically correct,” Schimek said of those people who prefer the phrase happy holidays to merry Christmas.
Schimek was in the process of buying two political satire books from a man called Loren Spivack. Spivack, who uses the nom de plume “Mr Truth”, had written the books himself.
Both works poke fun at the Democratic party – specifically Barack Obama, who is portrayed as the Cat in the Hat, and Hillary Clinton, who is imagined as the witch from The Wizard of Oz.
“I don’t think there’s anything wrong with saying ‘merry Christmas’,” Spivack said.
Trump has four years to force “merry Christmas” upon the American public, so perhaps change will eventually come to the US. He could certainly start by using the phrase in his own building.
When the news broke that the British Academy of Film and Television Arts (Bafta) is setting a new diversity standard, I was sceptical. From 2019, films will only be eligible to win the Bafta for outstanding British film or Outstanding debut by a British writer if they meet two of four criteria: movies must prove they have worked to improve diversity across characters and themes, senior roles and crew, industry training and progression, or appeal and be accessible to under-represented audiences. Alongside this criteria, Bafta has also changed the rules for admitting new members: people will no longer need to be recommended by two existing members to join.
I am one of the many film fans that finds the diversity debate tedious. The #OscarsSoWhite hashtag has been rolling around Twitter for years, and every awards season finds actors and filmmakers on roundtables speaking about ways the industry needs to be more diverse. But, year on year, things just don’t change. Last January, after yet another all-white list of acting nominees, the Academy awards announced a “sweeping series of substantive changes” that included “a goal to double the number of women and diverse members of the Academy by 2020”, but soon took great pains to reassure its older, white, male members that any changes would not be at their expense. I assumed the Bafta commitment would be just another vague gesture.
However, after fully reading the list of criteria and the statements from Bafta itself, I’ve got to admit that I’m impressed and cautiously optimistic for the future of British film. Diversity is such a tricky concept to attempt to quantify because it means so much, but it’s clear the Bafta team is looking beyond merely race; women, disabled and LGBT+ people, and those from lower socio-economic backgrounds will count towards achieving the diversity goals.
Despite the fears of some, I don’t believe the criteria will force films to insert arbitrary black, female, disabled, working-class or LGBT+ characters in an attempt to qualify. I recognise that art is art, and I’m sure there are films being made where it really is necessary for everyone on screen to be white or straight. What I refuse to accept is that there aren’t more films that can have more diverse characters and themes than we currently have. In recent years, the film industry has been open to giving lead roles written for men to women. Actors point out that nothing in the script implies the part needs to be male, and so Julia Roberts took a man’s part in Secret in Their Eyes, Sandra Bullock fought for the lead in Our Brand Is Crisis and, when Brad Pitt left The Gray Man, it was Charlize Theron who took his part. Women go for these roles simply because they’re often better than the parts that are written for female leads, and I wish for a time when their peers from all backgrounds can do the same. The new rules will hopefully force British filmmakers to consider if a character written as a straight, white, wealthy, able-bodied man really needs to stay that way.
That said, Bafta’s criteria explicitly gives filmmakers some leeway. You’re welcome to have an all-white film, for example, but then you need to commit to providing opportunities and having a diverse crew, or find ways for a wide range of people to see your movie. Perhaps these are the criteria that will make the biggest difference in the British film industry. According to the British Film Institute, only 3% to 6% of the cast and crew behind the films we watch are from black and minority ethnic backgrounds. Forty-six per cent of women make up the film workforce, but only 13.4% of UK films released were written by them, with the percentage of films directed by women even lower at 7.8%. The standard routes into the industry of unpaid internships and voluntary roles for “exposure” are deeply inaccessible for those from working-class backgrounds, LGBT+ people are rarely the ones to tell their own stories, and the numbers when it comes to representation of disabled people in the film workforce are particularly dismal at 0.3%.
Perhaps we are a long way from getting diversity in the film industry right, but Bafta’s commitment is a step in the right direction. The wide-reaching criteria acknowledges the way the film industry is connected: films reaching wider audiences can lead to a wider makeup of people entering the film industry, and diverse filmmakers and fewer barriers for the working class can lead to a more diverse cast and crew.
It is obvious Bafta’s move won’t be easy. Does a film need to be diverse across the board, or will all-white and able-bodied films with a mixed-gender cast and crew be enough, for example? I’m sure there will be a lot of kinks to work through as British film-makers find themselves defending the ways they have worked to improve diversity. The crucial point, however, is that now they will at least feel the need to try.
You could not have predicted, looking at the January 2016 issue of British Vogue, that this was the dawn of most tumultuous year in its century-long history. Gigi Hadid smiled out from her first cover, wholesomely covered-up in a weather-appropriate Breton-striped knit and classic black leather jacket, while coverlines promised to help you in the traditional post-Christmas challenge to find your waist and to discover the best cold-weather skincare. So far, so Vogue.
Traditionally, it is the European editions that get the magazine’s name in the headlines. The nipple count in any summer issue of French Vogue is enough to get the internet hot under the collar on any slow news day, although nothing can match the furore around the infamous 2010 shoot featuring primary-school-age girls in heavy eye makeup, low-cut dresses and high heels. Italian Vogue got into hot water in 2012 for a “Haute Mess” shoot, which drew accusations of racism for its dabbling in the imagery of ghetto fabulousness; two years earlier, Steven Meisel shot Kristen McMenamy as a glamorously dead bird, an homage to the animals killed by the Deepwater Horizon oil spill which wasn’t to everyone’s taste.
But in 2016 the upset became the norm, and this year it was the British and American issues of Vogue ruffling feathers. British Vogue pulled off an audacious centenary coup in landing the Duchess of Cambridge in her first ever turn as a cover girl. This seemingly inoffensive portrait of a smiling young royal in a sensible hat was to become the focus of controversy. Critics seized on it as dull and lacking in edge – unflattering comparisons were made with Princess Diana’s seminal 1991 cover, The cloak-and-dagger manoeuvring to keep the royal cover a secret lent a distinctly frosty edge to the BBC’s Inside Vogue documentary. Programme maker Richard Macer took offence at what he felt to be a breakdown of trust with editor Alex Shulman, with the result that the neutral tone usual for a fly on the wall documentary shifted into something unexpectedly cantankerous.
Meanwhile, uptown: never one to be outdone, Anna Wintour was the subject of another documentary, the feature-length First Monday in May, which followed the development of the 2015 Costume Institute Exhibition and its mega opening party, the Met Gala. That film underscored the alpha status of Wintour, who effortlessly stole the show despite sharing the screen with Rihanna and Kanye West. In one memorable scene, Wintour bats away the concerns of museum employees who question the necessity of closing a wing of New York’s largest museum for an entire Sunday for rehearsals, with a haughty and decisive statement that “the public will come back next week.” And while Wintour is certainly dragon lady in chief, her staff have joined her in breathing fire this year. Just in case the impression left by Emily Blunt and co in The Devil Wears Prada that the American Vogue office is inhabited by the scariest women on planet earth was in danger of fading, senior staffers used an innocuous fashion week wrap-up as a platform for a diatribe against bloggers, calling them “pathetic.”
Sadly, Vogue’s influence has its limits. Even the first-ever endorsement of a presidential candidate by Vogue could not win the election for Hillary Clinton. Which means that having spent the last eight years closely allied with the White House, Wintour’s Vogue enters 2017 as something of an enemy of Trump’s state. Watch this space.
As Christmas nears, and output slows, you’re always within six feet of a really grumpy person with a hangover, and many of us are beginning our annual festive slowdown. Office workers aren’t so much phoning it in as wandering away from their desks whenever their phones go off.
In my local supermarket yesterday, I spotted one employee riding up and down the frozen foods aisle while hanging off the side of a cage on wheels, singing “Have a Holly Jolly Christmas” while using a pricing gun as a microphone. Some of our colleagues were last spotted at the bar in Wetherspoon’s at 8pm, on the day of the work Christmas lunch, telling anyone who would listen that 2017 might be the year that they got “really into” Pernod.
While the majority of the working population manages to stay fairly professional for at least 11 months of the year, a few apply December Rules all year round. When you have a “proper” job, there’s always some temptation to behave improperly, and the more boundaries we push, the more relaxed we get about breaking the rules. No one minds the first time you’re five minutes late and panicking breathlessly, so next time it’s 10 minutes, and you stroll in clutching a coffee. You take a long, wine-fuelled lunch with your boss – then a longer, boozier one when your boss is away on holiday.
Suddenly you’re wondering whether it’s OK to take the Post-its home for personal use. Or if you’re Robin Pyke – a former housekeeper – whether you can drive your employer’s Porsche without permission (according to its owner, at least), have your boyfriend over and moonlight as a dogsitter on company property, in company time.
Pyke successfully sued his employers for unfair dismissal, after a tribunal ruled that they didn’t follow the correct procedures in letting him go. Does this mean there’s hope for those workers who might already be worried that they’ve “gone a bit far” this month? Will we all be able to look the boss in the eye on Friday when we wish them a final merry Christmas?
As a former office junior, and a fan of Mad Men, I’ve noticed that those who are the most badly behaved at work are usually the ones with the most power, or at least, an office with a lock on the door. Slacking off is a privilege to be earned. The trick is to know when you’ve been with an organisation long enough to start bending the rules – and to work out when you’ve stayed for too long. Your shortcuts turn into risks and you have to worry about whether you’re going to get yourself sacked, just to stay interested.
Bosses are human beings, and they have the same priorities as the rest of us during December. They just want to get through the month with minimal fuss, avoid any mention of secret Santa and be able to sit in their chair to rest their eyes at 4pm without question or comment. They don’t care what you do as long as it doesn’t disturb this routine. Being late the morning after the Christmas party probably isn’t an issue. Trying on your Asos deliveries in the back boardroom on a very quiet afternoon might be OK. Anything that is going to get you hauled up in front of HR, requiring them to go into that boardroom to tell you off will interrupt their own quiet, lazy routine and make them furious.
Ultimately it’s all about the difference between winding down for Christmas, and winding everyone else up. December marks the end of a long, challenging year. If we began it bright-eyed and bushy-tailed, resolving to give 110%, it’s only natural to end it feeling burned out, less than bothered and running at 90% or less. Laziness is forgivable. But if you’re bored, and using the festive slowdown to cause chaos, break clearly defined rules and make everything more difficult for your colleagues, you should probably start looking for a new job in the new year – and not just because you’re on the brink of being fired.
No one can be bothered to rock the boat in December, so your employers will probably overlook all but the most serious slip-ups. If you’ve got enough creative energy to make them angry, you probably have talents and ambitions that could be better fulfilled in a different workplace.
For many of us, Christmas is a time when we’re forced to leave our cosseted liberal-elite filter bubble of identity politics and small-batch quinoa snackpots and plunge back into the dark heart of Brexit. Spending time with your family – especially when your family doesn’t share your progressive values – can be excruciating at the best of times. But it’s going to be far worse this year, because this year they won.
There are four ways that you can face this onslaught: with a) militant counter-arguments, b) gentle persuasion, c) desperate attempts to find common ground and d) outrageous personal insults. Here are the topics most likely to crop up this year, along with all your potential responses.
a) “Donald Trump has insulted women, Mexicans and the disabled, and all signs point to him being ruinous for western democracy.”
b) “Don’t forget that Hillary Clinton won the popular vote, so his mandate isn’t as great as you think.”
c) “I’ll admit that his victory is in keeping with a growing mistrust of the political status quo; I was rooting for Bernie.”
d) “Well, you would say that, you dimwitted oaf.”
a) “He won four Brit Awards, two Grammys, an Ivor Novello award, sold 140m records and is widely regarded as one of the most influential recording artists of all time.”
b) “Oh, come on, I’ve been in the car with you while you were singing along to Jean Genie.”
c) “You know who I miss most? Paul Daniels. Now there was an entertainer with mainstream appeal.”
d) “Oh yeah? Well, I never really understood why Mum ever had sex with you.”
a) “The leaders of the leave movement were a former Times columnist with strong links to Rupert Murdoch, a man who went to the same school as PG Wodehouse and someone called Alexander Boris de Pfeffel Johnson. You would be hard pushed to find a more elitist crowd.”
b) “Please tell me one thing that’s genuinely changed for the better since the Brexit vote.”
c) “I’m not happy about the referendum result, but I guess that’s democracy for you.”
d) “You’re just upset because you think quinoa is a type of Nissan.”
a) “Does he? He has stood for election as an MP seven times, and lost seven times. He hijacked the leave campaign despite being officially sidelined, and all but ambushed Donald Trump to further his own grimy career. The man is a rat.”
b) “Really? Remember that anti-migrant poster he unveiled during the referendum? That seemed especially unpleasant.”
c) “I’ll agree that the moustache he grew was quite funny.”
d) “I can’t wait for you to die.”
a) “The latest migration report from the Office for National Statistics shows that applications for asylum in the UK are almost half of what they were 14 years ago. Your paranoia is the result of a decades-long fearmongering campaign by the rightwing press.”
b) “With the greatest respect, one Nepalese family moving into a house three streets down doesn’t constitute a lot of immigration.”
c) “Yes, but look at how much better the restaurants have got.”
d) “Pipe down, you racist tit.”
a) “Clearly, that isn’t the argument. This is a movement aimed singularly at a judicial system that’s statistically weighted against black people. What you’re doing is the equivalent of pulling up outside a food bank in a Lexus and whining because nobody is giving you any free baked beans.”
b) “Surely, you can understand the outrage that many felt after George Zimmerman’s acquittal?”
c) “You know what else matters? Stuffing. What a delicious meal this is.”
d) “Yours doesn’t, you absolute spanner.”
a) “One, Harambe was an ape and not a monkey. Two, his shooting raises a number of important questions about the nature of keeping animals in captivity that we would be stupid to ignore at this juncture.”
b) “Of course it makes sense. Zookeepers had to decide between killing a gorilla or potentially allowing it to harm a child. That’s a huge choice.”
c) “People should concentrate on the bigger issues, such as Trump and Farage and ... actually, never mind.”
d) “I wish you would go to Cincinnati so someone could shoot you, you obnoxious tool.”
a) “Really? According to Nasa, the six-month period from January to June 2016 was the warmest half-year on record. Plus, the Arctic sea-ice extent is now 40% smaller than it was 40 years ago. The Earth is undeniably getting warmer.”
b) “That simply isn’t true. You know that outbreak of fungus on your pear tree? The Royal Horticultural Society believes the upsurge of the disease could be linked to climate change.”
c) “Hey, I’m all for anything that lets me wear shorts more often.”
d) “Then this must all be down to the hot air you spout, you flatulent gasbag.”
a) “Did we lose? As well as Hillary Clinton gaining more than 2m more votes than Donald Trump, 62.5% of the British electorate did not vote to leave the EU. Your victories are products of imperfect systems and nothing more.”
b) “The right to freedom of expression is a core foundation of every democratic society. If the results had been reversed, you would want to complain about it, too.”
c) “Win or lose, aren’t we all just people? Aren’t the relationships we have with one another more important than the broad and temporary sweep of international politics? Surely what matters more than anything is our ability to accept each other’s superficial differences.”
d) “I hate you, I hate Christmas and I’m pleased that Auntie June left you for her watercolour tutor.”
To find the dress for you, work within your own style. A bold colour is an easy way to make an impact and florals make a festive addition that feels more relaxed than a LBD
It’s true what they say, Christmas dinner is nothing but a big Sunday roast. What we so-called experts don’t add, however – lest you all decide to bin the turkey and go to the pub instead – is that it’s a Sunday roast where everyone is either half-cut or high on sugar, various relatives aren’t on speaking terms and it’s well-nigh impossible to get a takeaway delivered if it all goes wrong.
Not only that, but it’s happening on a day on which any inadvertent break with tradition, however minor, will pass into family lore, to be retold ad infinitum until everyone involved is long dead. In short, although I don’t want to stress you out, this is one meal it pays to approach with almost military precision and a watertight contingency plan should things start to unravel quicker than the plot of the compulsory Christmas Bond outing.
Consider this article that contingency plan. Rip it out and stash it in the kitchen with the emergency sherry, just in case – a kind of lucky charm, and my Christmas gift to you.
More common than you might think – these are big birds. But it’s easy to solve without resulting to chainsawing the bird in half on the lawn. Instead, whip off the legs by using a sharp knife to cut through the skin at the point where they meet the body so you can see the joint, then pull the leg away from the body until it pops out of the socket. Cut between the joint to finish the job. The legs can be cooked in a separate roasting tin; put them in about half an hour before the bird itself, and you’ll end up with juicy breasts and perfect legs – and who wouldn’t want that for Christmas?
Trust me, however hard you slam the door, it’s not going to make any difference. Fortunately at this time of year you can get away with storing stuff in the garage, porch, conservatory, shed or even the car. As long as it’s somewhere dry and fox-proof, cheese, salad and veg, cooked meats, cream and other dairy will be perfectly fine outside for a few days. Once you get the turkey out on Christmas morning (allow at least two hours for it to come to room temperature before cooking), you can stock the fridge with wine, beer and soft drinks. And if there’s still no room, the quickest way to chill drinks is to stick them in a bucket with equal volumes of ice and water and a good handful of salt.
Special diets are easy to cater for with enough notice, but a last-minute announcement can throw even the best plans into disarray. Hopefully you’ll have olive oil on hand to roast a few goose-fat-free spuds for the wretched boy, but if you don’t happen to have any pastry in the freezer to knock up a freeform cheese tart then keep things simple with a chargrilled wedge of cauliflower, broccoli or cabbage, depending on what you have to hand. Cut through it vertically to give chunky cross-sections or wedges, then brush with oil and season with salt and pepper. Heat a griddle pan to very high, then chargrill on each side until they beginning to blacken and soften. Turn the heat down and cook until tender (about 10 more minutes), then squeeze a little lemon juice over and serve with the usual festive accompaniments, and a fixed smile.
If, even after a decent rest (leave an hour for the juices to be reabsorbed into the meat), the breast is still as dry as dust, then check the legs; as they cook more slowly, they might well be perfect. If so, remove the meat from them and arrange temptingly on a platter to encourage people to take that instead. Carve the breast into thick slices in the kitchen, away from prying eyes, then dip each in warm chicken stock for a couple of seconds before transferring it to a serving dish. Drizzle a ladleful of hot gravy artfully across the top and it will look like you always intended to serve the turkey this way.
We’ve all done it: proudly cut into a magnificently bronzed bird at the festive table only to recoil in horror at the lurid pinkness within. This shouldn’t be a problem if you’ve been sensible enough to invest in a meat thermometer, and not taken the turkey out of the oven until the thickest part of the thigh reaches 65C, but sadly, such hindsight is unlikely to butter any parsnips. Joint the bird, spread the pieces out on a baking tray and roast at 200C, checking their internal temperature every 15 minutes (but no more often, to avoid bringing the oven temperature down). Keep pouring those drinks in the meantime.
Just as sprouts were finally shaking off their sulphurous reputation, you’ve taken your eye off the ball and now the whole house smells like 1955. At this point, remember the cook’s mantra: cream makes everything better. Drain the sprouts very well then, if you were planning to sauté them with bacon, fry that on its own, and toss the sprouts in the pan to coat with the juices at the end. Bring some double cream (about 150ml for every 500g of veg) to a simmer in a small pan along with a crushed clove of garlic and a good grating of nutmeg. Stir in the sprouts, season and tip into an ovenproof dish and top with a handful of breadcrumbs and grated parmesan, if you have some handy. Grill for about five minutes until golden and bubbling, then serve up with some pomp and ceremony as sprout gratin.
As long as they are already cooked through, this one is easy to fix. While someone else is carving the turkey, melt a little more of whatever fat you cooked them in (if it’s not already liquid) and brush this over the top of the pallid potatoes. Toast them under the grill until they achieve your desired shade, then turn them over and repeat the process for golden perfection.
Don’t panic: gravy can sense fear. Instead, calmly take a whisk to the roasting tin or pan and set about breaking down as many large lumps of undissolved flour as you can spot. Pass the gravy through a sieve into a jug and then reheat or, if it still doesn’t seem thick enough, whisk a couple of spoonfuls of warm gravy into a tablespoon of corn or plain flour until you have a loose paste, then very gradually whisk this back into the pan on the hob. Heat, stirring, until the gravy thickens to your desired consistency.
Take a few deep breaths. This happens when custard overheats, and is surprisingly simple to sort if you happen to have a stick blender to hand. Pour the custard out into a heatproof bowl as soon as you notice lumps forming, and then whizz it until smooth. Strain it back into the pan through a sieve and continue stirring until thickened. If you don’t happen to have such an implement, plunge the pan into a sink of iced water as soon as you spot the first lump, and whisk vigorously, channelling all your rage into your wrist. Remember to strain it before serving – if there’s not enough to go round, simply pad it out with more cream and call it crème anglaise.
Although it goes without saying that your pudding ought to be hot, it’s also helpful to warm your booze of choice slightly, too, though obviously not enough to burn off the precious alcohol. You can do this by holding a metal spoon full of it above a candle (which gives you the advantage of being able to tilt the spoon into the flame to catch light as you pour it over the pudding) or alternatively by heating it in a small pan on the hob and using a match or lighter instead. Whichever way you go for, always start by ensuring the lights are off around the table and people are primed and ready to coo appreciatively over your achievement before the damn thing goes out. Happy Christmas, one and all!
I used to be a clinical nurse specialist in kidney transplantation. Prior to that I had been in charge of home heamodialysis and cared for many patients in remote areas. On Christmas Eve I had been working and went to bed around midnight. At 1am I had a call from a patient of mine whom I had looked after on home dialysis. A kidney had become available and he had been called in for a transplant. He was in tears. He told me he had been waiting for this moment for six years but now that the time had come he felt so sad. He was sad that a family was devastated at the loss of a loved one on Christmas Day but happy to have the chance of a new life. I reassured him that the family who had lost a loved one would be comforted that the kidney was being gifted to such a wonderful man who would use the opportunity to lead a full life.
He then told me that he would remember this Christmas Day for the rest of his life and that, on receiving the call, I was the first and only person he wanted to talk to. He said: “You are an outstanding nurse. Wish me luck. Hopefully this is my last day of needing dialysis. Thank you for always being there. I never thought I would say this but I’ll miss you!” He had a transplant that day and had over a decade of healthy kidney function. That Christmas was one of my best ever.
While I’m always a little sad to be away from my family, I’m lucky enough to be part of a wonderful work team. We have our own traditions and put lots of effort into celebrating Christmases spent together. We’ve won the best decorated ward three years running, we all wear Christmas jumpers and eat our NHS Christmas dinners in the canteen together. Our receptionist even comes in on Christmas morning dressed as Santa to deliver our secret Santa gifts. As we work in maternity, anyone who can’t be discharged home to be with family is normally more than happy to be spending their Christmas with us as they’re getting one of the best gifts delivered on Christmas Day. Last year when we started the Christmas Day shift we only had one woman in labour; she needed to be delivered by caesarean section and was taken into theatre. At the same time the brass band and choir had arrived on the ward to sing carols. They stood just outside the theatre and performed When a child is born and Away in a manger while our first baby of that Christmas was born. While all births are wonderful to be a part of, this one was unforgettable; there wasn’t a dry eye in the theatre.
This year will be my first Christmas off this century. I’ve spent the last 15 working with people with learning disabilities in residential care homes. It’s always a great day. Life and bodily functions go on, but the Christmas spirit is always wide and the enthusiasm of the people we support is contagious. Being left in an empty London and watching everyone I know make their way back home is strangely liberating. I’ll feel odd moving with the crowds this year.
One year I was managing a home where there had been a lot of issues with staff and staff tension. It was my first Christmas there and I was determined to make it a special day for everyone. We made so much effort to make it work. We were all eating together with Christmas songs in the background; everyone was wearing a paper hat and a colleague and I burst into tears as a result of what we had achieved.
Over 30 years ago on Christmas Eve morning a teenage girl was transferred from a district general hospital to the regional cardio-thoracic intensive care unit where I worked, having sustained serious chest injuries in a car crash. I was in charge of the unit for the late shift on Christmas Day, and looked after her for the shift. She was on a ventilator and heavily sedated. I can remember her parents at her bedside and explaining every procedure I was carrying out to keep them as well informed as possible and to de-mystify an often frightening environment for families. It was touch and go and she had numerous life threatening emergencies over the next few weeks. No one knew whether she was going to make it, but she did and was discharged a few months later. She returned to the hospital where she had originally been admitted to thank the staff for her initial care. We received a letter from the consultant there telling us he couldn’t believe she’d survived her injuries and praising us all to the skies. I bumped into her a few years later; she was doing her nurse training and wanted to specialise in intensive care.
I no longer work over Christmas, but my favourite memory of doing so was learning that one of my clients, who was over 100 years old, had a daughter who lived around the corner from the sheltered scheme. Her daughter was too elderly and unwell to collect her mother, so I arranged to take her to her daughter’s house where she had Christmas lunch with her daughter, grandchildren and great grandchildren. It still makes me happy to think of it.
Join the Healthcare Professionals Network to read more about issues like this. And follow us on Twitter (@GdnHealthcare) to keep up with the latest healthcare news and views.
This Christmas, don’t expect to see Sir David Attenborough balancing an octopus on top of a warthog while trying to mate a toucan with a shark. Although if the BBC needs a festive ratings boost, it’s a thought.
You might see it happen on your kitchen table, though, if you own Beasts of Balance. The new augmented board game sits somewhere in between Jenga and Skylanders, with your efforts to build a tower of animals reflected in the digital world of its companion app.
The £69 game started life as a project called Fabulous Beasts, co-created by a group of eight to 12 year olds with a British startup called Sensible Objects. One £168k crowdfunding campaign on Kickstarter later – plus a name change after a trademark run-in with the Hollywood Studio behind the Fantastic Beasts film – and Beasts of Balance was born.
The aim of the game is to build your tower of animals as high as possible. In the box, you get a battery-powered plinth on top of which you build your stack, an NFC reader to “scan” the Beasts of Balance pieces, and Bluetooth to connect to the companion app for Android or iOS.
You also get a set of durable plastic “artefacts” including six beasts: a bear, an eagle, a shark, a warthog, a toucan and an octopus. They’re colourful and deliberately minimalist representations of the animals, similar to the characters in Crossy Road, but less blocky.
Other pieces include crosses and “migration” arrows; elemental artefacts representing combinations of fire, earth, water and air; and “miracle” artefacts that are this game’s equivalent of power-ups.
Whether you’re playing alone or with others, Beasts of Balance involves stacking the artefacts one at a time to form a tower on top of the plinth, with the twist that as you place them, they appear and have an effect on-screen in the app.
For example, in a two-player game: if the first player scans then places the bear; the second scans then balances the octopus on top of it; and then the first player scans and balances a cross artefact, the two beasts spawn a Pawpoise, which is a combination of the two.
Play progresses from there: the on-screen beasts have a semi-random number of points attached to them, which decrease if a beast is subsequently played that scores a higher number of points. Lower beast scores can be increased by using matching elemental artefacts, such as earth for the land dwelling bear, to try and boost their scores past the highest ranked animal.
The fun comes from finding out what different combinations of beasts and other artefacts do, with new animals stored in the app’s built-in bestiary to track your progress.
When the stack topples, you have a few seconds to reconstruct it before an on-screen volcano erupts, but if you fail it’s game over – and a check to see if your points total beat your previous best effort.
Beasts of Balance is designed as a family game that appeals to the current generation of kids who’ve grown up with tablets, but which also draws them out into tabletop cooperative gameplay with physical objects.
Is the core gameplay mechanic enough to keep those children interested beyond the first few games? It has been for my seven- and nine year-old sons, although not for the reason I expected.
They’re quite interested in filling empty slots in Beasts of Balance’s bestiary, but much keener on uncovering new and better ways to stack its beasts and artefacts, trying new orientations and combinations to build ever-bigger and more-stable stacks.
The cooperative gameplay is one of Beasts of Balance’s selling points, certainly for parents looking for a game to get their family round a table working together, rather than sparking arguments from over-competitive instincts.
The flipside here is that when my two children were playing together, they still managed to argue – usually about whose “fault” it was when the stack toppled.
To put it another way, in a two-player game of Jenga, when one player topples the tower, the other player is the winner, and happy. In a two-player game of Beasts of Balance, the risk is that when the stack falls, both players are furious.
Whether that says more about the inability of my sons to lose graciously rather than a failing in Beasts of Balance I’m not sure.
Sensible Objects has a few ideas to keep the game interesting in the longer term. It’s already selling two new beasts as £15 add-ons: the “Omnibeast” and the “Lalnalion” – the latter designed by YouTube gaming crew Yogscast.
There’s also a £20 “DIY Artefacts” pack of RFID tags, which children can stick to their own toys to make them part of the game. Future updates to the app could also add new gameplay modes, including a more competitive option.
Beasts of Balance isn’t cheap at £69, so that ability for digital updates to breathe more life into its physical components will be important if it’s to provide value for money in the longer term.
The price may put some parents off what is an unknown brand, but early adopters will find lots to enjoy in Beasts of Balance – not to mention getting a sense of how digital and physical play can interweave in a way that gets families laughing together, rather than staring into separate screens.
Christmas shopping with my mother as a teenager in the 1980s: a fraught affair, both of us in our default roles. Me, disabled, a wheelchair user and mum, my primary carer. There’s no social care, no support. My mum, a cheerful, seldom sulky woman, always did her best for me but we got stuck. Me feeling the angst of obligation, seamed with guilt, and my mum gritty in her duty to my needs.
Our shopping relationship attained new levels of mutual frustration at Christmas. Especially when, bitten by the punk revolution, I took to presenting myself in a defiance of multicoloured hair extensions, goth makeup and a preponderance of black. At one point, long-suffering mummy insisted on walking behind me rather than with me, as I cruised forward in my mobility scooter.
Christmas at home in the council estate ghetto of the otherwise well-heeled Chalfonts in Buckinghamshire was not exactly one of shiny baubles and carols round the gas fire. As I grew older I retained a sense of missing out on something even though, post-punk, I espoused a hatred of Christmas and all its consumerist horror. Yet, always contrary, this was the time of my love affair with the mail order catalogue – Marshall Ward, Littlewoods, Ace. I indulged my urge to buy and not worry about paying immediately.
At a time when I had no life and lived in a downstairs bedroom, with the mother/daughter; carer/cared-for roles unchanging, the rebel within me was fighting to find a way out. Meanwhile, I assuaged my conscience, buying Christmas gifts from activist groups – CND, Greenpeace, International Fund for Animal Welfare. The latter had an endless range of baby seal offerings – cute festive pressies for my only two friends. Not so cute when my cheques bounced. And mum going into a righteous silence all through the removal of the decorations.
When I managed to move to east London I had a stab at living independently. In those days, this meant literally attempting to do everything for yourself. An approach that broke down rather quickly when you consider I couldn’t wrap myself in warm clothes, let alone wrap any presents. My first serious boyfriend was no real help to the conundrum of Christmas shopping. He avoided it at all costs.
I took to buying the odd gift surreptitiously when we ventured out for food, although the game was up the year I tried to buy five sets of Snoopy stationery along with the cheese and baked beans.
Then a revelation. A change so fundamental to my Christmas shopping that I can never overestimate its impact. The arrival of Independent Living (IL), as an ideology and a new way of receiving “care” support. Started in the US, at Berkeley, University of California, by disabled students, once it crossed the Atlantic disabled activists in the UK realised it was revolutionary – that independence is about choice, control and facilitation, primarily through giving instructions to another person.
IL brought the development of the Independent Living Fund and the concept of direct payments, which enabled disabled people to manage their own needs: “What I want, when I want it.” An effort towards an equality in daily living that non-disabled people can take for granted.
Don’t get me wrong – it’s great having a personal assistant you have chosen to wash your bottom, make you a cuppa, get you out of bed. But in 1995, in my 30s, here was the ultimate. Christmas shopping in Walthamstow market with Debbie, my first true PA, recruited once my direct payment funding came through.
There are men yelling “pound-a-bowl” and “reeeeeeal Christmas trees, only a fiver!”, amid the East End hustle and bustle. And there I was, in a place where I could indulge my too-long frustrated, inner Christmas shopper – the big kid who has never browsed 100 Christmas fairies or flicked through the Christmas jumpers on 10 different stalls; choosing the very best one for mum.
Debbie came from Nottinghamshire. She was funny, immensely competent, a similar age to me and took it for granted that I would want to have choice in shopping, festive or otherwise.
On shopping trips she was my arms and legs, doing the flicking and packing the goodies into bags. That the only boundaries were ones set by myself – and my bank balance – ignited a lifelong excitement about Christmas shopping. It connected me to a sense of free adulthood, to the simple joy of choosing. When you’ve never had this for most of your developing years, it’s sweet and always will be.
 Of her portraits, she says: ‘I choose people who have a certain way about them, and people seem to see me a certain way and treat me as they think I might like. I assume there’s a big element of projection coming from me too, but working with people always involves collaboration’
The eternal human struggle to live meaningfully in the face of inevitable death entered its newest phase one Monday in the summer of 2007, when employees of Google gathered to hear a talk by a writer and self-avowed geek named Merlin Mann. Their biggest professional problem was email, the digital blight that was colonising more and more of their hours, squeezing out time for more important work, or for having a life. And Mann, a rising star of the “personal productivity” movement, seemed like he might have found the answer.
He called his system “Inbox Zero”, and the basic idea was simple enough. Most of us get into bad habits with email: we check our messages every few minutes, read them and feel vaguely stressed about them, but take little or no action, so they pile up into an even more stress-inducing heap. Instead, Mann advised his audience that day at Google’s Silicon Valley campus, every time you visit your inbox, you should systematically “process to zero”. Clarify the action each message requires – a reply, an entry on your to-do list, or just filing it away. Perform that action. Repeat until no emails remain. Then close your inbox, and get on with living.
“It was really just a way of saying, ‘I suck at email, and here’s stuff that makes me suck less at it – you may find it useful,’” Mann recalled later. But he had stumbled on a rich seam of societal anxiety. Hundreds of thousands of people watched his talk online, and Inbox Zero spawned countless blog posts, along with books and apps. It was the Atkins diet for nerds: if you weren’t doing it yourself, you almost certainly knew someone who was. Mann’s followers triumphantly posted screenshots of their empty inboxes; the New Yorker, discerning his increasingly cult-like following, described his system as “halfway between Scientology and Zen”. (The New York Post called it bullshit.)
If all this fervour seems extreme – Inbox Zero was just a set of technical instructions for handling email, after all – this was because email had become far more than a technical problem. It functioned as a kind of infinite to-do list, to which anyone on the planet could add anything at will. For the “knowledge workers” of the digital economy, it was both metaphor and delivery mechanism for the feeling that the pressure of trying to complete an ever-increasing number of tasks, in a finite quantity of time, was becoming impossible to bear.
Most of us have experienced this creeping sense of being overwhelmed: the feeling not merely that our lives are full of activity – that can be exhilarating – but that time is slipping out of our control. And today, the personal productivity movement that Mann helped launch – which promises to ease the pain with time-management advice tailored to the era of smartphones and the internet – is flourishing as never before. There are now thousands of apps in the “productivity” category of the Apple app store, including software to simulate the ambient noise of working in a coffee shop (this has been shown, in psychology experiments, to help people focus on work), and a text editor that deletes the words you have written if you don’t keep typing fast enough.
The quest for increased personal productivity – for making the best possible use of your limited time – is a dominant motif of our age. Two books on the topic by the New York Times journalist Charles Duhigg have spent more than 60 weeks on the US bestseller lists between them, and the improbable titular promise of another book, The Four Hour Work Week, has seduced a reported 1.35m readers worldwide. There are blogs offering tips on productive dating, and on the potential result of productive dating, productive parenting; signs have been spotted in American hotels wishing visitors a “productive stay”. The archetypal Silicon Valley startup, in the last few years, has been one that promises to free up time and mental capacity by eliminating some irritating “friction” of daily life – shopping or laundry, or even eating, in the case of the sludgy, beige meal replacement Soylent – almost always for the purpose of doing more work.
And yet the truth is that more often than not, techniques designed to enhance one’s personal productivity seem to exacerbate the very anxieties they were meant to allay. The better you get at managing time, the less of it you feel that you have. Even when people did successfully implement Inbox Zero, it didn’t reliably bring calm. Some interpreted it to mean that every email deserved a reply, which only shackled them more firmly to their inboxes. (“That drives me crazy,” Mann says.) Others grew jumpy at the thought of any messages cluttering an inbox that was supposed to stay pristine, and so ended up checking more frequently. My own dismaying experience with Inbox Zero was that becoming hyper-efficient at processing email meant I ended up getting more email: after all, it’s often the case that replying to a message generates a reply to that reply, and so on. (By contrast, negligent emailers often discover that forgetting to reply brings certain advantages: people find alternative solutions to the problems they were nagging you to solve, or the looming crisis they were emailing about never occurs.)
The allure of the doctrine of time management is that, one day, everything might finally be under control. Yet work in the modern economy is notable for its limitlessness. And if the stream of incoming emails is endless, Inbox Zero can never bring liberation: you’re still Sisyphus, rolling his boulder up that hill for all eternity – you’re just rolling it slightly faster.
Two years after his Google talk, Mann released a rambling and slightly manic online video in which he announced that he had signed a contract for an Inbox Zero book. But his career as a productivity guru had begun to stir an inner conflict. “I started making pretty good money from it” – from speaking and consulting – “but I also started to feel terrible,” he told me earlier this year. “This topic of productivity induces the worst kind of procrastination, because it feels like you’re doing work, but I was producing stuff that had the express purpose of saying to people, ‘Look, come and see how to do your work, rather than doing your work!’”
The book missed its publication date. Fans started asking questions. Then, after two more years, Mann published a self-lacerating essay in which he abruptly announced that he was jettisoning the project. It was the 3,000-word howl of a man who had suddenly grasped the irony of missing morning after morning with his three-year-old daughter because he was “typing bullshit that I hoped would please my book editor” about how to use time well. He was guilty, he declared, of “abandoning [my] priorities to write about priorities … I’ve unintentionally ignored my own counsel to never let your hard work fuck up the good things.” He hinted that he might write a different kind of book instead – a book about stuff that really mattered – but it never appeared. “I’m mostly out of the productivity racket these days,” Mann told me. “If you’re just using efficiency to jam more and more stuff into your day … well, how would you ever know that that’s working?”
It’s understandable that we respond to the ratcheting demands of modern life by trying to make ourselves more efficient. But what if all this efficiency just makes things worse?
Given that the average lifespan consists of only about 4,000 weeks, a certain amount of anxiety about using them well is presumably inevitable: we’ve been granted the mental capacities to make infinitely ambitious plans, yet almost no time at all to put them into practice. The problem of how to manage time, accordingly, goes back at least to the first century AD, when the Roman philosopher Seneca wrote On The Shortness of Life. “This space that has been granted to us rushes by so speedily, and so swiftly that all save a very few find life at an end just when they are getting ready to live,” he said, chiding his fellow citizens for wasting their days on pointless busyness, and “baking their bodies in the sun”.
Clearly, then, the challenge of how to live our lives well is not a new one. Still, it is safe to say that the citizens of first-century Rome didn’t experience the equivalent of today’s productivity panic. (Seneca’s answer to the question of how to live had nothing to do with becoming more productive: it was to give up the pursuit of wealth or high office, and spend your days philosophising instead.) What is uniquely modern about our fate is that we feel obliged to respond to the pressure of time by making ourselves as efficient as possible – even when doing so fails to bring the promised relief from stress.
The time-pressure problem was always supposed to get better as society advanced, not worse. In 1930, John Maynard Keynes famously predicted that within a century, economic growth would mean that we would be working no more than 15 hours per week – whereupon humanity would face its greatest challenge: that of figuring out how to use all those empty hours. Economists still argue about exactly why things turned out so differently, but the simplest answer is “capitalism”. Keynes seems to have assumed that we would naturally throttle down on work once our essential needs, plus a few extra desires, were satisfied. Instead, we just keep finding new things to need. Depending on your rung of the economic ladder, it’s either impossible, or at least usually feels impossible, to cut down on work in exchange for more time.
Arguably the first time management guru – the progenitor of the notion that personal productivity might be the answer to the problem of time pressure – was Frederick Winslow Taylor, an engineer hired in 1898 by the Bethlehem Steel Works, in Pennsylvania, with a mandate to improve the firm’s efficiency. “Staring out over an industrial yard that covered several square miles of the Pennsylvania landscape, he watched as labourers loaded 92lb [iron bars] on to rail cars,” writes Matthew Stewart, in his book The Management Myth. “There were 80,000 tons’ worth of iron bars, which were to be carted off as fast as possible to meet new demand sparked by the Spanish-American war. Taylor narrowed his eyes: there was waste here, he was certain.”
The Bethlehem workers, Taylor calculated, were shifting about 12.5 tons of iron per man per day – but predictably, when he offered a group of “large, powerful Hungarians” some extra cash to work as fast as they could for an hour, he found that they performed much better. Extrapolating to a full work day, and guesstimating time for breaks, Taylor concluded, with his trademark blend of self-confidence and woolly maths, that every man ought to be shifting 50 tons per day – four times their usual amount.
Workers were naturally unhappy at this transparent attempt to pay them the same money for more work, but Taylor was not especially concerned with their happiness; their job was to implement, not understand, his new philosophy of “scientific management”. “One of the very first requirements for a man who is fit to handle pig iron,” wrote Taylor, is “that he shall be so stupid and phlegmatic that he more nearly resembles in his mental makeup the ox than any other type … he is so stupid that the word ‘percentage’ has no meaning for him.”
